Isaac Barrow - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.

1 Early life and education 1.

2 Early career 1.

2.

1 Travel 1.

3 Later career 1.

3.

1 Work 1.

3.

2 Death and legacy 2 Calculating tangents 3 Publications 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Isaac Barrow 46 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English Christian theologian, and mathematician This article is about the mathematician.

For the Bishop of St.

Asaph, see Isaac Barrow (bishop).

The Reverend Isaac Barrow Portrait of Barrow by Mary Beale Born October 1630 London, England Died 4 May 1677 (1677-05-04) (aged 46) London, England Nationality English Education Felsted School , Trinity College, Cambridge Known for Fundamental theorem of calculus Optics Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions Trinity College, Cambridge , Gresham College Academic advisors James Duport Notable students Isaac Newton Notes His mentor was James Duport who was a classicist, but Barrow really learned his mathematics by working under Gilles Personne de Roberval in Paris and Vincenzo Viviani in Florence.

Isaac Barrow (October 1630 – 4 May 1677) was an English Christian theologian and mathematician who is generally given credit for his early role in the development of infinitesimal calculus ; in particular, for proof of the fundamental theorem of calculus.

[1] His work centered on the properties of the tangent ; Barrow was the first to calculate the tangents of the kappa curve.

He is also notable for being the inaugural holder of the prestigious Lucasian Professorship of Mathematics , a post later held by his student, Isaac Newton.

Life [ edit ] Early life and education [ edit ] Lectiones habitae in scholiis publicis academiae Cantabrigiensis AD 1664 Barrow was born in London.

He was the son of Thomas Barrow, a linen draper by trade.

In 1624, Thomas married Ann, daughter of William Buggin of North Cray, Kent and their son Isaac was born in 1630.

It appears that Barrow was the only child of this union—certainly the only child to survive infancy.

Ann died around 1634, and the widowed father sent the lad to his grandfather, Isaac, the Cambridgeshire J.

P.

, who resided at Spinney Abbey.

[2] Within two years, however, Thomas remarried; the new wife was Katherine Oxinden, sister of Henry Oxinden of Maydekin, Kent.

From this marriage, he had at least one daughter, Elizabeth (born 1641), and a son, Thomas, who apprenticed to Edward Miller, skinner, and won his release in 1647, emigrating to Barbados in 1680.

[3] Early career [ edit ] Isaac went to school first at Charterhouse (where he was so turbulent and pugnacious that his father was heard to pray that if it pleased God to take any of his children he could best spare Isaac), and subsequently to Felsted School , where he settled and learned under the brilliant puritan Headmaster Martin Holbeach who ten years previously had educated John Wallis.

[4] Having learnt Greek, Hebrew, Latin and logic at Felsted, in preparation for university studies, [5] he continued his education at Trinity College, Cambridge ; he enrolled there because of an offer of support from an unspecified member of the Walpole family , "an offer that was perhaps prompted by the Walpoles' sympathy for Barrow's adherence to the Royalist cause.

" [6] His uncle and namesake Isaac Barrow , afterwards Bishop of St Asaph , was a Fellow of Peterhouse.

He took to hard study, distinguishing himself in classics and mathematics; after taking his degree in 1648, he was elected to a fellowship in 1649.

[7] Barrow received an MA from Cambridge in 1652 as a student of James Duport ; he then resided for a few years in college, and became candidate for the Greek Professorship at Cambridge, but in 1655 having refused to sign the Engagement to uphold the Commonwealth , he obtained travel grants to go abroad.

[8] Travel [ edit ] He spent the next four years travelling across France, Italy, Smyrna and Constantinople, and after many adventures returned to England in 1659.

He was known for his courageousness.

Particularly noted is the occasion of his having saved the ship he was upon, by the merits of his own prowess, from capture by pirates.

He is described as "low in stature, lean, and of a pale complexion," slovenly in his dress, and having a committed and long-standing habit of tobacco use (an inveterate smoker ).

In respect to his courtly activities his aptitude to wit earned him favour with Charles II , and the respect of his fellow courtiers.

In his writings one might find accordingly, a sustained and somewhat stately eloquence.

He was an altogether impressive personage of the time, having lived a blameless life in which he exercised his conduct with due care and conscientiousness.

[9] Later career [ edit ] Work [ edit ] On the Restoration in 1660, he was ordained and appointed to the Regius Professorship of Greek at the University of Cambridge.

In 1662, he was made professor of geometry at Gresham College , and in 1663 was selected as the first occupier of the Lucasian chair at Cambridge.

During his tenure of this chair he published two mathematical works of great learning and elegance, the first on geometry and the second on optics.

In 1669 he resigned his professorship in favour of Isaac Newton.

[10] About this time, Barrow composed his Expositions of the Creed, The Lord's Prayer, Decalogue, and Sacraments.

For the remainder of his life he devoted himself to the study of divinity.

He was made a Doctor of Divinity by Royal mandate in 1670, and two years later Master of Trinity College (1672), where he founded the library, and held the post until his death.

Statue of Isaac Barrow in the chapel of Trinity College, Cambridge His earliest work was a complete edition of the Elements of Euclid , which he issued in Latin in 1655, and in English in 1660; in 1657 he published an edition of the Data.

His lectures, delivered in 1664, 1665, and 1666, were published in 1683 under the title Lectiones Mathematicae ; these are mostly on the metaphysical basis for mathematical truths.

His lectures for 1667 were published in the same year, and suggest the analysis by which Archimedes was led to his chief results.

In 1669 he issued his Lectiones Opticae et Geometricae.

It is said in the preface that Newton revised and corrected these lectures, adding matter of his own, but it seems probable from Newton's remarks in the fluxional controversy that the additions were confined to the parts which dealt with optics.

This, which is his most important work in mathematics, was republished with a few minor alterations in 1674.

In 1675 he published an edition with numerous comments of the first four books of the On Conic Sections of Apollonius of Perga , and of the extant works of Archimedes and Theodosius of Bithynia.

In the optical lectures many problems connected with the reflection and refraction of light are treated with ingenuity.

The geometrical focus of a point seen by reflection or refraction is defined; and it is explained that the image of an object is the locus of the geometrical foci of every point on it.

Barrow also worked out a few of the easier properties of thin lenses, and considerably simplified the Cartesian explanation of the rainbow.

Barrow was the first to find the integral of the secant function in closed form , thereby proving a conjecture that was well-known at the time.

Death and legacy [ edit ] Barrow died unmarried in London at the early age of 46, and was buried at Westminster Abbey.

John Aubrey , in the Brief Lives , attributes his death to an opium addiction acquired during his residence in Turkey.

Besides the works above mentioned, he wrote other important treatises on mathematics, but in literature his place is chiefly supported by his sermons, [11] which are masterpieces of argumentative eloquence, while his Treatise on the Pope's Supremacy is regarded as one of the most perfect specimens of controversy in existence.

Barrow's character as a man was in all respects worthy of his great talents, though he had a strong vein of eccentricity.

Calculating tangents [ edit ] The geometrical lectures contain some new ways of determining the areas and tangents of curves.

The most celebrated of these is the method given for the determination of tangents to curves , and this is sufficiently important to require a detailed notice, because it illustrates the way in which Barrow, Hudde and Sluze were working on the lines suggested by Fermat towards the methods of the differential calculus.

Fermat had observed that the tangent at a point P on a curve was determined if one other point besides P on it were known; hence, if the length of the subtangent MT could be found (thus determining the point T ), then the line TP would be the required tangent.

Now Barrow remarked that if the abscissa and ordinate at a point Q adjacent to P were drawn, he got a small triangle PQR (which he called the differential triangle, because its sides QR and RP were the differences of the abscissae and ordinates of P and Q ), so that K TM : MP = QR : RP.

To find QR : RP he supposed that x , y were the co-ordinates of P , and x − e , y − a those of Q (Barrow actually used p for x and m for y , but this article uses the standard modern notation).

Substituting the co-ordinates of Q in the equation of the curve, and neglecting the squares and higher powers of e and a as compared with their first powers, he obtained e : a.

The ratio a / e was subsequently (in accordance with a suggestion made by Sluze) termed the angular coefficient of the tangent at the point.

Barrow applied this method to the curves x 2 ( x 2 + y 2 ) = r 2 y 2 , the kappa curve ; x 3 + y 3 = r 3 ; x 3 + y 3 = rxy , called la galande ; y = ( r − x ) tan π x /2 r , the quadratrix ; and y = r tan π x /2 r.

It will be sufficient here to take as an illustration the simpler case of the parabola y 2 = px.

Using the notation given above, we have for the point P , y 2 = px ; and for the point Q : ( y − a ) 2 = p ( x − e ).

Subtracting we get 2 ay − a 2 = pe.

But, if a be an infinitesimal quantity, a 2 must be infinitely smaller and therefore may be neglected when compared with the quantities 2 ay and pe.

Hence 2 ay = pe , that is, e : a = 2 y : p.

Therefore, TM : y = e : a = 2 y : p.

Hence TM = 2 y 2 / p = 2 x.

This is exactly the procedure of the differential calculus, except that there we have a rule by which we can get the ratio a / e or dy / dx directly without the labour of going through a calculation similar to the above for every separate case.

Publications [ edit ] Epitome Fidei et Religionis Turcicae (1658) "De Religione Turcica anno 1658" (poem) Euclidis Elementorum (1659) [in Latin] Euclide's Elements (1660) [in English] translations of Euclid's Elements Lectiones Opticae (1669) Lectiones Geometricae (1670), translated as Geometrical Lectures (1735) by Edmund Stone , later translated as The Geometrical Lectures of Isaac Barrow (1916) by James M.

Child [12] Apollonii Conica (1675) translation of Conics Archimedis Opera (1675) translation of Archimedes ’s works Theodosii Sphaerica (1675) translation of Theodosius' Spherics A Treatise on the Pope's Supremacy, to which is Added a Discourse Concerning the Unity of the Church (1680) ( 1859 edition ) Lectiones Mathematicae (1683) translated as The Usefulness of Mathematical Learning (1734) by John Kirkby Of Contentment, Patience, and Resignation to the Will of God (1685) The works of the learned Isaac Barrow, D.

D.

(1700) Vol.

1 , Vol.

2–3 The Works of Dr.

Isaac Barrow (1830), Vol.

1 , Vol.

2 , Vol.

3 , Vol.

4 , Vol.

5 , Vol.

6 , Vol.

7 [sermons and theological essays] See also [ edit ] The lunar crater Barrow is named after him Gresham Professors of Geometry References [ edit ] ^ Child, James Mark; Barrow, Isaac (1916).

The Geometrical Lectures of Isaac Barrow.

Chicago: Open Court Publishing Company.

^ 'The Abbey Scientists' Hall, A.

R.

p12: London; Roger & Robert Nicholson; 1966 ^ Cheesman, Francis (2005).

Isaac Newton's Teacher (first ed.

).

Victoria, BC, Canada: Trafford Publishing.

p.

115.

ISBN 1-4120-6700-6.

^ Craze, M.

R.

(1955).

A History of Felsted School, 1564–1947.

Cowell.

^ O'Connor, J.

J.

; Robertson, E.

F.

"gap-system".

School of Mathematics and Statistics University of St Andrews.

Archived from the original on 26 December 2010.

Retrieved 1 February 2012.

^ Feingold, Mordechai (1990).

Before Newton: The Life and Times of Isaac Barrow.

Cambridge University Press.

p.

256.

ISBN 9780521306942.

^ "Barrow, Isaac (BRW643I)".

A Cambridge Alumni Database.

University of Cambridge.

^ Manuel, Frank E.

(1968).

A Portrait of Isaac Newton.

Belknap Press, MA.

p.

92.

^ D.

R.

Wilkins – Trinity College, Dublin School of Mathematics.

Retrieved 1 February 2012 ^ For a summary of the Barrow–Newton relationship, see Gjersten, Derek (1986).

The Newton Handbook.

London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

pp.

54–55.

^ Isaac Barrow, John Tillotson, Abraham Hill – The works of the learned Isaac Barrow.

Printed by J.

Heptinstall, for Brabazon Aylmer, 1700 Published by DR JOHN TILLOTSON THE LORD ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY {&} Isaac Barrow – The theological works of Isaac Barrow, Volume 1 The University Press, 1830 {&} Isaac Barrow, Thomas Smart Hughes 1831 – The Works of Dr.

Isaac Barrow: With Some Account of His Life, Summary of Each Discourse, Notes, &c (1831) - Fourth Volume A.

J.

Valpy.

Retrieved 1 February 2012 ^ Dresden, Arnold (1918).

"Review: The Geometrical Lectures of Isaac Barrow , translated, with notes and proofs, by James Mark Child" (PDF).

Bull.

Amer.

Math.

Soc.

24 (9): 454–456.

doi : 10.

1090/s0002-9904-1918-03122-4.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 April 2014.

Further reading [ edit ] " Barrow, Isaac ", A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature , 1910 – via Wikisource W.

W.

Rouse Ball.

A Short Account of the History of Mathematics (4th edition, 1908) Clinton Bennett , Promise, Predicament and Perplexity: Isaac Barrow (1630–1677) on Islam ( Gorgias Press , 2022) Cheesman, Francis W.

(2005).

Isaac Newton's Teacher.

Trafford.

ISBN 9781412067003.

Feingold, Mordechai, ed.

(1990).

Before Newton: The life and times of Isaac Barrow.

Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521306942.

Hill, Abraham (1830) [1683].

"Biographical Memoir of Dr.

Isaac Barrow".

The Works of Dr.

Isaac Barrow.

By Barrow, Isaac.

Hughes, Thomas Smart (ed.

).

Vol.

1.

A.

J.

Valpy.

pp.

ix–xcii.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Isaac Barrow at Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote has quotations related to Isaac Barrow.

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Barrow, Isaac ".

O'Connor, John J.

; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Isaac Barrow" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Isaac Barrow at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Works by Isaac Barrow at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Isaac Barrow at Internet Archive The Master of Trinity at Trinity College, Cambridge Correspondence of Scientific Men of the Seventeenth Century at Google Books The Usefulness of Mathematical Learning Explained and Demonstrated at Google Books Academic offices Preceded by Ralph Widdrington Regius Professor of Greek University of Cambridge 1660–1663 Succeeded by James Valentine Preceded by John Pearson Master of Trinity College, Cambridge 1672–1677 Succeeded by John North v t e Lucasian Professors of Mathematics Isaac Barrow (1664) Isaac Newton (1669) William Whiston (1702) Nicholas Saunderson (1711) John Colson (1739) Edward Waring (1760) Isaac Milner (1798) Robert Woodhouse (1820) Thomas Turton (1822) George Biddell Airy (1826) Charles Babbage (1828) Joshua King (1839) George Stokes (1849) Joseph Larmor (1903) Paul Dirac (1932) James Lighthill (1969) Stephen Hawking (1979) Michael Green (2009) Michael Cates (2015) v t e Sir Isaac Newton Publications Fluxions (1671) De Motu (1684) Principia (1687) Opticks (1704) Queries (1704) Arithmetica (1707) De Analysi (1711) Other writings Quaestiones (1661–1665) " standing on the shoulders of giants " (1675) Notes on the Jewish Temple (c.

1680) " General Scholium " (1713; " hypotheses non fingo " ) Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728) Corruptions of Scripture (1754) Contributions Calculus fluxion Impact depth Inertia Newton disc Newton polygon Newton–Okounkov body Newton's reflector Newtonian telescope Newton scale Newton's metal Spectrum Structural coloration Newtonianism Bucket argument Newton's inequalities Newton's law of cooling Newton's law of universal gravitation post-Newtonian expansion parameterized gravitational constant Newton–Cartan theory Schrödinger–Newton equation Newton's laws of motion Kepler's laws Newtonian dynamics Newton's method in optimization Apollonius's problem truncated Newton method Gauss–Newton algorithm Newton's rings Newton's theorem about ovals Newton–Pepys problem Newtonian potential Newtonian fluid Classical mechanics Corpuscular theory of light Leibniz–Newton calculus controversy Newton's notation Rotating spheres Newton's cannonball Newton–Cotes formulas Newton's method generalized Gauss–Newton method Newton fractal Newton's identities Newton polynomial Newton's theorem of revolving orbits Newton–Euler equations Newton number kissing number problem Newton's quotient Parallelogram of force Newton–Puiseux theorem Absolute space and time Luminiferous aether Newtonian series table Personal life Woolsthorpe Manor (birthplace) Cranbury Park (home) Early life Later life Apple tree Religious views Occult studies Scientific Revolution Copernican Revolution Relations Catherine Barton (niece) John Conduitt (nephew-in-law) Isaac Barrow (professor) William Clarke (mentor) Benjamin Pulleyn (tutor) John Keill (disciple) William Stukeley (friend) William Jones (friend) Abraham de Moivre (friend) Depictions Newton by Blake (monotype) Newton by Paolozzi (sculpture) Isaac Newton Gargoyle Astronomers Monument Namesake Newton (unit) Newton's cradle Isaac Newton Institute Isaac Newton Medal Isaac Newton Telescope Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes XMM-Newton Sir Isaac Newton Sixth Form Statal Institute of Higher Education Isaac Newton Newton International Fellowship Categories Isaac Newton v t e Masters of Trinity College, Cambridge John Redman William Bill John Christopherson Robert Beaumont John Whitgift John Still Thomas Nevile John Richardson Leonard Mawe Samuel Brooke Thomas Comber Thomas Hill John Arrowsmith John Wilkins Henry Ferne John Pearson Isaac Barrow John North John Montagu Richard Bentley Robert Smith John Hinchliffe Thomas Postlethwaite William Lort Mansel Christopher Wordsworth William Whewell William Hepworth Thompson Henry Montagu Butler J.

J.

Thomson G.

M.

Trevelyan Edgar Adrian Rab Butler Alan Hodgkin Andrew Huxley Michael Atiyah Amartya Sen Martin Rees Gregory Winter Sally Davies v t e Fellows of the Royal Society elected in 1662 Fellows Isaac Barrow Sir John Brookes Ralph Cudworth John Graunt George Lane William Schroter Robert Spencer Henry de Vic Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Norway Spain France BnF data Germany Italy Israel Belgium United States Sweden Czech Republic Australia Greece Netherlands Poland Portugal Vatican Academics CiNii MathSciNet Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie Trove Other SNAC IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.

wikipedia.

org/w/index.

php?title=Isaac_Barrow&oldid=1227271478 " Categories : Alumni of Trinity College, Cambridge English Anglicans 17th-century English mathematicians Lucasian Professors of Mathematics Masters of Trinity College, Cambridge Original Fellows of the Royal Society Academics of Gresham College People educated at Charterhouse School People educated at Felsted School 17th-century Anglicans 1630 births 1677 deaths English Christian theologians Vice-Chancellors of the University of Cambridge Regius Professors of Greek (Cambridge) 17th-century Anglican theologians Burials at Westminster Abbey Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2018 Articles with hCards Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from SBDEL Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from SBDEL with Wikisource reference Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ICCU identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with KBR identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with PortugalA identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with CINII identifiers Articles with MATHSN identifiers Articles with MGP identifiers Articles with ZBMATH identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with SNAC-ID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 4 June 2024, at 19:23 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.

0 ; additional terms may apply.

By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view.