Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Main Page Main Page Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikimedia Foundation MediaWiki Meta-Wiki Wikimedia Outreach Wikispecies Wikibooks Wikidata Wikifunctions Wikimania Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wiktionary Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit.

6,852,192 articles in English From today's featured article Jacques Offenbach (1819–1880) was a German-born French composer, cellist and impresario.

He is remembered for his nearly 100 operettas of the 1850s to the 1870s, and his uncompleted opera The Tales of Hoffmann.

Beginning as a cellist and conductor, Offenbach first wrote small-scale one-act pieces, limited by theatrical licensing laws.

These eased by 1858 when he premiered his first full-length operetta, Orphée aux enfers ( Orpheus in the Underworld ).

La belle Hélène (1864) and other successes followed.

The risqué humour (often about sexual intrigue) and gentle satire in these pieces, together with Offenbach's facility for melody, made them internationally known, and he was a powerful influence on later operetta and musical theatre composers.

His best-known works were continually revived during the 20th century, and many of his operettas continue to be staged in the 21st century.

The Tales of Hoffmann remains part of the standard opera repertory.

( Full article.

) Recently featured: UEFA Euro 2004 final Alan Wace Hypericum sechmenii Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know.

Giado concentration camp.

that Libyan Jews and Arabs traded and bartered with each other at the fence of the Giado concentration camp (pictured) ?.

that environmental journalist Gloria Dickie wrote her thesis on how cities in Colorado changed garbage laws to prevent bear incursions?.

that Brunel University's lecture centre has been described as "imposing" and "frightening", but also as "an expressive centrepiece" and "a brutalist classic"?.

that Benjamin Jackson was likely paid at least $300 to fight in the American Civil War as Lewis Saunders?.

that, of the three presidents of the Chamber of Dutch Culture , two were arrested and one was assassinated?.

that the inclusion of two preteen competing performers at the Eurovision Song Contest 1989 led to the introduction of an age rule for participants at future contests?.

that a gunman who, in 1960, shot three people dead in Sheffield , England, was deported to Somalia, where he was killed in a shoot-out while "running amok"?.

that Iowa government social worker Catherine G.

Williams started out as a tap dancer ?.

that Banner in the Sky inspired a Canadian dentist to climb the Matterhorn ? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Krejčíková (left) and Alcaraz In tennis, Barbora Krejčíková and Carlos Alcaraz (both pictured) win the women's and men's singles , respectively, at the Wimbledon Championships.

Former United States president Donald Trump survives an assassination attempt during a political rally near Butler, Pennsylvania.

The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority.

In Iran, the reformist candidate Masoud Pezeshkian is elected president in the second round of the presidential election.

Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Nana Nuriana Joe Engle Diana Hill Maxine Singer Khyree Jackson Liana Isakadze Nominate an article On this day July 15 : Marine Day in Japan (2024) Psy 1799 – French soldiers at Fort Julien , near the Egyptian port city of Rashid , uncovered the Rosetta Stone , which was essential in the decipherment of ancient Egyptian scripts.

1870 – Following the transfer of Rupert's Land from the Hudson's Bay Company , Manitoba was established as a province of Canada.

1943 – The all-female Emilia Plater Independent Women's Battalion was formed in the Soviet Union's First Polish Army.

2009 – Caspian Airlines Flight 7908 crashed in northwestern Iran, killing all 168 people aboard.

2012 – South Korean rapper Psy (pictured) released his hit single " Gangnam Style ".

Almira Lincoln Phelps ( b.

1793; d.

1884) Anton Chekhov ( d.

1904) Nigel Williams ( b.

1944) Christine Chubbuck ( d.

1974) More anniversaries: July 14 July 15 July 16 Archive By email List of days of the year From today's featured list Daniel Radcliffe Thirty-seven awards from 101 nominations were won by Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 , a 2011 fantasy film directed by David Yates from a screenplay by Steve Kloves.

The film received particular recognition for its acting – mainly that of Daniel Radcliffe (pictured) – its musical score, its production design, and its visual effects.

It received three nominations at the 84th Academy Awards , including Best Visual Effects.

At the 65th British Academy Film Awards , the film was nominated for Best Production Design , Best Sound , and Best Makeup and Hair , and won Best Special Visual Effects.

It received four nominations at the 17th Critics' Choice Awards and won two awards.

The National Board of Review selected The Deathly Hallows – Part 2 as one of its top ten films of 2011.

( Full list.

) Recently featured: New England Revolution seasons Chief justices of India Looking Glass Studios video games Archive More featured lists Today's featured picture The bronze-winged jacana ( Metopidius indicus ) is a wader in the family Jacanidae.

It is found across South and Southeast Asia.

Like other jacanas, it forages on lilies and other floating aquatic vegetation, using its long feet and legs for balance.

The sexes are alike but females are slightly larger and are polyandrous , maintaining a harem of males during the breeding season in the monsoon rains.

Males maintain territories, with one male in the harem chosen to incubate the eggs and take care of the young.

When threatened, young chicks may be carried to safety by the male under his wings.

This bronze-winged jacana was photographed in Kumarakom on the shore of Vembanad , the largest lake in the Indian state of Kerala.

Photograph credit: Charles J.

Sharp Recently featured: Happy Chandler The Death of Marat Village weaver Archive More featured pictures Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements.

Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues.

Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement.

Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia.

Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia.

Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics.

Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia.

Wikipedia's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English.

Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below.

1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.

wikipedia.

org/w/index.

php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 " 49 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 This page was last edited on 23 May 2024, at 17:32 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.

0 ; additional terms may apply.

By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view.