Jeremy Bentham - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.

1 Early life 1.

2 Abortive prison project and the Panopticon 1.

3 Correspondence and contemporary influences 1.

4 South Australian colony proposal 1.

5 Westminster Review 1.

6 Personal life 1.

7 Legacy 2 Work Toggle Work subsection 2.

1 Utilitarianism 2.

1.

1 Hedonistic/felicific calculus 2.

1.

2 Criticisms 2.

2 Economics 2.

3 Law reform 2.

4 Animal rights 2.

5 Gender and sexuality 2.

6 Imperialism 2.

7 Privacy 2.

8 Fictional entities 3 Death and the auto-icon 4 University College London 5 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 5.

1 Publications 5.

2 Posthumous publications 5.

2.

1 Bowring (1838–1843) 5.

2.

2 Stark (1952–1954) 5.

2.

3 Bentham Project (1968–present) 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.

1 Notes 7.

2 Citations 7.

3 Sources 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Jeremy Bentham 76 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British philosopher, jurist, and social reformer (1748–1832) Jeremy Bentham Portrait of Bentham by Henry William Pickersgill Born ( 1748-02-15 ) 15 February 1748 [ O.

S.

4 February 1747/8] London, England Died 6 June 1832 (1832-06-06) (aged 84) London, England Education The Queen's College, Oxford ( MA ) Era 18th-century philosophy 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Utilitarianism Legal positivism Liberalism Radicalism Epicureanism Main interests Political philosophy , philosophy of law , ethics , economics Notable ideas Principle of utility Felicific calculus Signature This article is part of a series on Liberalism in the United Kingdom Schools Classical Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Whiggist Conservative Muscular Economic Green Neo Radical Social Principles Civil and political rights Due process Economic freedom Economic progressivism Environmentalism Equality before the law Freedom of the press Freedom of religion Freedom of speech Laissez-faire Rule of law Social justice Welfare state History English Civil War Glorious Revolution Anti-Corn Law League Victorian era Chartism People Acton Arnold Asquith Bentham Berlin Beveridge Bright Burke Cobden Collingwood Fawcett Gladstone Green Hayek Hobhouse Hunt Jenkins Keynes Locke Lloyd George Macaulay Mill Naoroji Paine Priestley Ricardo Smith Spencer Taylor Mill Wollstonecraft Parties Alliance Party of Northern Ireland Liberal Democrats Liberal Party Peelite Radicals Scottish Liberal Democrats Social Democratic Party Whigs Media The Economist Financial Times The Guardian The Independent The Sunday Times The Times Related topics Centrism Centre-left Centre-right Conservatism in the United Kingdom Liberal conservatism Politics of the United Kingdom Socialism in the United Kingdom Liberal socialism Liberalism portal United Kingdom portal v t e Part of a series on Radicalism History Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Belgian Revolution Chartism History of liberalism Progressive Era Ideas Anti-clericalism Civic nationalism Civil liberties Classical liberalism Cultural radicalism Classical radicalism Direct democracy Egalitarianism Freedom of movement Jacobinism Labor movement Liberal socialism Social democracy Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Modernity Populism Left-wing populism Progressivism Rationalism Reform movement Republicanism Revolution Secularism Laicité Social change Social justice Social liberalism Suffrage Women's suffrage Utilitarianism Utopian socialism Welfare People Alem Atatürk Bentham Bolívar Cartwright Clemenceau Cobbett Dewey Fox Garibaldi George Godwin Green Hébert Hobhouse Jefferson Lloyd George Mazzini Mendès France Mill (James) Mill (John) Mommsen Mossadegh Paine Papanastasiou Papandreou Plastiras Robespierre Roosevelt Rosselli Roux Saint-Just Stevens Venizelos Virchow Wilkes Wilson Wollstonecraft Groups Action Party 1853 1942 Alfarista Radical Front Alsatian Progress Party Association of Radicals for the United States of Europe Authentic Radical Liberal Party Blue Party Centre Union Centre Union – New Forces Union of the Democratic Centre Civic Workers' Party Colombian Liberal Party Cordeliers Hébertists Clear Grits Czech National Social Party Czech Realist Party Czech Constitutionalist Progressive Party Democrat Party Democratic Left of Catalonia Democratic-Republican Party Democratic Socialist Party of Greece Georgios Papandreou Party Democratic Union Democratic Union-Agricultural and Labour Party Democrats 66 Ecuadorian Radical Liberal Party European Radical Alliance European Republicans Movement Fabian Society (elements) German Free-minded Party German People's Party FDP.

The Liberals Far Left Federal Democratic Republican Party Free Democratic Party/Radical Democratic Party Free-minded People's Party Free-minded Union Free-thinking Democratic League Foxite Giustizia e Libertà GroenLinks Historical Far Left Independence Club Independent Radicals International Entente of Radical and Similar Democratic Parties Italian Democratic Liberal Party Italian Radical Party Italian Radicals Italian Republican Party Jacksonian Democrats Jacobin The Mountain Labour Democratic Party Left Centre Left Liberals Liberal Democratic Party of Afghanistan Liberals, Democrats and Radicals Liberal Party Liberal Reformers Liberal Swedish Party Manhood Suffrage League Mexican Liberal Party More Europe Movement for Constitutional Freedoms National and Social Liberation National Radical Party National Progressive Center Union National Reform Union National Union New Liberals Opportunist Republicans Parti rouge Partido Ecologista Radical Intransigente Party of Democratic Socialism Party of Independence and '48 People's Party People's Radical Party 1881 1919 1990 Political Party of Radicals Popular Councils Portuguese Republican Party Democratic Party Progressive Democratic Party of the North Progressive Party Belgium South Korea United States Progressive People's Party Radical Cause Radical Change Radical Civic Union Radicales K Radical Democracy Radical Democracy Party Radical Democratic Party Bulgaria Estonia India Spain Ukraine Radical Federative Movement Radical League Radical Liberal Party Luxembourg Paraguay Radical Left Party Radical Left Radical Movement Radical Movement of Social Democratic Alliance Radical Party Bolivia France Hungary Italy Luxembourg Radical Party of Chile 1863 2018 Radical Party of the Left Radical People's Party Finland Norway Turkey Radical Republican Party Radical Republicans Radical Socialist Party Luxembourg Estonia Radical Socialist Republican Party Radical Whigs Radicals of the Left Radicals (UK) Reform League Republican Action Republican Democratic Concentration Republican Left Spain (1934) Spain (1977) Italy Republican Union Resolution Party Rose in the Fist Rose Street Club ROSSEM Social Democracy Social Democratic Party Socialist Radical Party Stratford Dialectical and Radical Club Transnational Radical Party Ultra-radicals Union, Progress and Democracy Universal League for the Material Elevation of the Industrious Classes Young Ireland By region Bulgaria Chile Denmark Ecuador France Hungary Italy Paraguay Romania Spain Switzerland United States Related Conservative liberalism History of socialism Irish republicanism Liberalism in Europe History portal Liberalism portal v t e Jeremy Bentham ( / ˈ b ɛ n θ ə m / ; 4 February 1747/8 O.

S.

[15 February 1748 N.

S.

] – 6 June 1832) was an English philosopher , jurist , and social reformer regarded as the founder of modern utilitarianism.

[1] [2] [3] [4] [5] Bentham defined as the "fundamental axiom " of his philosophy the principle that "it is the greatest happiness of the greatest number that is the measure of right and wrong.

" [6] [7] He became a leading theorist in Anglo-American philosophy of law , and a political radical whose ideas influenced the development of welfarism.

He advocated individual and economic freedoms , the separation of church and state , freedom of expression , equal rights for women, the right to divorce, and (in an unpublished essay) the decriminalising of homosexual acts.

[8] [9] He called for the abolition of slavery , capital punishment , and physical punishment , including that of children.

[10] He has also become known as an early advocate of animal rights.

[11] [12] [13] [14] Though strongly in favour of the extension of individual legal rights , he opposed the idea of natural law and natural rights (both of which are considered "divine" or "God-given" in origin), calling them "nonsense upon stilts".

[3] [15] Bentham was also a sharp critic of legal fictions.

Bentham's students included his secretary and collaborator James Mill , the latter's son, John Stuart Mill , the legal philosopher John Austin and American writer and activist John Neal.

He "had considerable influence on the reform of prisons, schools, poor laws, law courts, and Parliament itself.

" [16] On his death in 1832, Bentham left instructions for his body to be first dissected, and then to be permanently preserved as an " auto-icon " (or self-image), which would be his memorial.

This was done, and the auto-icon is now on public display in the entrance of the Student Centre at University College London (UCL).

Because of his arguments in favour of the general availability of education, he has been described as the "spiritual founder" of UCL.

However, he played only a limited direct part in its foundation.

[17] Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Portrait of Bentham by the studio of Thomas Frye , 1760–1762 Bentham was born on 4 February 1747/8 O.

S.

[15 February 1748 N.

S.

] in Houndsditch , London , [1] to attorney Jeremiah Bentham and Alicia Woodward, widow of a Mr Whitehorne and daughter of mercer Thomas Grove, of Andover.

[18] [19] His wealthy family were supporters of the Tory party.

He was reportedly a child prodigy: he was found as a toddler sitting at his father's desk reading a multi-volume history of England, and he began to study Latin at the age of three.

[20] He learnt to play the violin , and at the age of seven Bentham would perform sonatas by Handel during dinner parties.

[21] He had one surviving sibling, Samuel Bentham (1757–1831), with whom he was close.

He attended Westminster School ; in 1760, at age 12, his father sent him to The Queen's College, Oxford , where he completed his bachelor's degree in 1764, receiving the title of MA in 1767.

[1] He trained as a lawyer and, though he never practised, was called to the bar in 1769.

He became deeply frustrated with the complexity of English law, which he termed the "Demon of Chicane".

[22] When the American colonies published their Declaration of Independence in July 1776, the British government did not issue any official response but instead secretly commissioned London lawyer and pamphleteer John Lind to publish a rebuttal.

[23] His 130-page tract was distributed in the colonies and contained an essay titled "Short Review of the Declaration" written by Bentham, a friend of Lind, which attacked and mocked the Americans' political philosophy.

[24] [25] Abortive prison project and the Panopticon [ edit ] In 1786 and 1787, Bentham travelled to Krichev in White Russia (modern Belarus ) to visit his brother, Samuel , who was engaged in managing various industrial and other projects for Prince Potemkin.

It was Samuel (as Jeremy later repeatedly acknowledged) who conceived the basic idea of a circular building at the hub of a larger compound as a means of allowing a small number of managers to oversee the activities of a large and unskilled workforce.

[26] [27] Bentham began to develop this model, particularly as applicable to prisons, and outlined his ideas in a series of letters sent home to his father in England.

[28] He supplemented the supervisory principle with the idea of contract management ; that is, an administration by contract as opposed to trust, where the director would have a pecuniary interest in lowering the average rate of mortality.

[29] The Panopticon was intended to be cheaper than the prisons of his time, as it required fewer staff; "Allow me to construct a prison on this model", Bentham requested to a Committee for the Reform of Criminal Law, "I will be the gaoler.

You will see.

that the gaoler will have no salary—will cost nothing to the nation.

" As the watchmen cannot be seen, they need not be on duty at all times, effectively leaving the watching to the watched.

According to Bentham's design, the prisoners would also be used as menial labour, walking on wheels to spin looms or run a water wheel.

This would decrease the cost of the prison and give a possible source of income.

[30] The ultimately abortive proposal for a panopticon prison to be built in England was one among his many proposals for legal and social reform.

[31] But Bentham spent some sixteen years of his life developing and refining his ideas for the building and hoped that the government would adopt the plan for a National Penitentiary appointing him as contractor-governor.

Although the prison was never built, the concept had an important influence on later generations of thinkers.

Twentieth-century French philosopher Michel Foucault argued that the panopticon was paradigmatic of several 19th-century " disciplinary " institutions.

[32] Bentham remained bitter throughout his later life about the rejection of the panopticon scheme, convinced that it had been thwarted by the King and an aristocratic elite.

Philip Schofield argues that it was largely because of his sense of injustice and frustration that he developed his ideas of "sinister interest"—that is, of the vested interests of the powerful conspiring against a wider public interest—which underpinned many of his broader arguments for reform.

[33] Elevation , section and plan of Bentham's panopticon prison, drawn by Willey Reveley in 1791 On his return to England from Russia, Bentham had commissioned drawings from an architect, Willey Reveley.

[34] In 1791, he published the material he had written as a book, although he continued to refine his proposals for many years to come.

He had by now decided that he wanted to see the prison built: when finished, it would be managed by himself as contractor-governor, with the assistance of Samuel.

After unsuccessful attempts to interest the authorities in Ireland and revolutionary France, [35] he started trying to persuade the prime minister, William Pitt , to revive an earlier abandoned scheme for a National Penitentiary in England, this time to be built as a panopticon.

He was eventually successful in winning over Pitt and his advisors, and in 1794 was paid £2,000 for preliminary work on the project.

< [36] The intended site was one that had been authorised (under an act of 1779 [ which? ] ) for the earlier penitentiary, at Battersea Rise; but the new proposals ran into technical legal problems and objections from the local landowner, Earl Spencer.

[37] Other sites were considered, including one at Hanging Wood, near Woolwich , but all proved unsatisfactory.

[38] Eventually Bentham turned to a site at Tothill Fields, near Westminster.

Although this was common land, with no landowner, there were a number of parties with interests in it, including Earl Grosvenor , who owned a house on an adjacent site and objected to the idea of a prison overlooking it.

Again, therefore, the scheme ground to a halt [39] At this point, however, it became clear that a nearby site at Millbank , adjoining the Thames , was available for sale, and this time things ran more smoothly.

Using government money, Bentham bought the land on behalf of the Crown for £12,000 in November 1799.

[40] From his point of view, the site was far from ideal, being marshy, unhealthy, and too small.

When he asked the government for more land and more money, however, the response was that he should build only a small-scale experimental prison—which he interpreted as meaning that there was little real commitment to the concept of the panopticon as a cornerstone of penal reform [41] Negotiations continued, but in 1801 Pitt resigned from office, and in 1803 the new Addington administration decided not to proceed with the project.

[42] Bentham was devastated: "They have murdered my best days.

" [43] Nevertheless, a few years later the government revived the idea of a National Penitentiary, and in 1811 and 1812 returned specifically to the idea of a panopticon.

[44] Bentham, now aged 63, was still willing to be governor.

However, as it became clear that there was still no real commitment to the proposal, he abandoned hope, and instead turned his attentions to extracting financial compensation for his years of fruitless effort.

His initial claim was for the enormous sum of nearly £700,000, but he eventually settled for the more modest (but still considerable) sum of £23,000.

[45] The Penitentiary House, etc.

Act 1812 [ d ] ( 52 Geo.

3.

c.

44) transferred his title in the site to the Crown.

More successful was his cooperation with Patrick Colquhoun in tackling the corruption in the Pool of London.

This resulted in the Depredations on the Thames Act 1800 ( 39 & 40 Geo.

3.

c.

87) [46] The Act created the Thames River Police , which was the first preventive police force in the country and was a precedent for Robert Peel 's reforms 30 years later.

[47] : 67–69 Correspondence and contemporary influences [ edit ] Bentham was in correspondence with many influential people.

In the 1780s, for example, Bentham maintained a correspondence with the ageing Adam Smith , in an unsuccessful attempt to convince Smith that interest rates should be allowed to freely float.

[48] As a result of his correspondence with Mirabeau and other leaders of the French Revolution , Bentham was declared an honorary citizen of France.

[1] He was an outspoken critic of the revolutionary discourse of natural rights and of the violence that arose after the Jacobins took power (1792).

Between 1808 and 1810, he held a personal friendship with Latin American revolutionary Francisco de Miranda and paid visits to Miranda's Grafton Way house in London.

He also developed links with José Cecilio del Valle.

[49] [50] In 1821, John Cartwright proposed to Bentham that they serve as "Guardians of Constitutional Reform", seven "wise men" whose reports and observations would "concern the entire Democracy or Commons of the United Kingdom".

Describing himself, among the names mentioned which also included Sir Francis Burdett , George Ensor , and Sir Matthew Wood , and as a "nonentity", Bentham declined the offer.

[51] South Australian colony proposal [ edit ] On 3 August 1831 the Committee of the National Colonization Society approved the printing of its proposal to establish a free colony on the south coast of Australia, funded by the sale of appropriated colonial lands, overseen by a joint-stock company, and which would be granted powers of self-government as soon as was practicable.

Contrary to assumptions, Bentham had no hand in the preparation of the 'Proposal to His Majesty's Government for founding a colony on the Southern Coast of Australia, which was prepared under the auspices of Robert Gouger , Charles Grey, 2nd Earl Grey , and Anthony Bacon.

Bentham did, however, in August 1831, draft an unpublished work entitled 'Colonization Company Proposal', which constitutes his commentary upon the National Colonization Society's 'Proposal'.

[52] Westminster Review [ edit ] In 1823, he co-founded The Westminster Review with James Mill as a journal for the " Philosophical Radicals "—a group of younger disciples through whom Bentham exerted considerable influence in British public life.

[53] [54] One was John Bowring , to whom Bentham became devoted, describing their relationship as "son and father": he appointed Bowring political editor of The Westminster Review and eventually his literary executor.

[55] Another was Edwin Chadwick , who wrote on hygiene, sanitation, and policing and was a major contributor to the Poor Law Amendment Act : Bentham employed Chadwick as a secretary and bequeathed him a large legacy.

[47] : 94 Personal life [ edit ] Bentham had several infatuations with women, and wrote on sex.

[56] He never married.

[57] An insight into his character is given in Michael St.

John Packe's The Life of John Stuart Mill : During his youthful visits to Bowood House , the country seat of his patron Lord Lansdowne , he had passed his time at falling unsuccessfully in love with all the ladies of the house, whom he courted with a clumsy jocularity, while playing chess with them or giving them lessons on the harpsichord.

Hopeful to the last, at the age of eighty he wrote again to one of them, recalling to her memory the far-off days when she had "presented him, in ceremony, with the flower in the green lane" [citing Bentham's memoirs].

To the end of his life he could not hear of Bowood without tears swimming in his eyes, and he was forced to exclaim, "Take me forward, I entreat you, to the future—do not let me go back to the past.

" [58] A psychobiographical study by Philip Lucas and Anne Sheeran argues that he may have had Asperger's syndrome.

[59] Bentham's daily pattern was to rise at 6 am, walk for 2 hours or more, and then work until 4 pm.

[60] Legacy [ edit ] The Faculty of Laws at University College London occupies Bentham House, next to the main UCL campus.

[61] Bentham's name was adopted by the Australian litigation funder IMF Limited to become Bentham IMF Limited on 28 November 2013, in recognition of Bentham being "among the first to support the utility of litigation funding".

[62] Work [ edit ] Utilitarianism [ edit ] Part of a series on Utilitarianism Predecessors Mozi Shantideva David Hume Claude Adrien Helvétius Cesare Beccaria William Godwin Francis Hutcheson William Paley Key proponents Jeremy Bentham John Stuart Mill Henry Sidgwick R.

M.

Hare Peter Singer Types of utilitarianism Negative Rule Act Two-level Total Average Preference Classical Key concepts Pain Suffering Pleasure Utility Happiness Eudaimonia Consequentialism Equal consideration Felicific calculus Utilitarian social choice rule Problems Demandingness objection Mere addition paradox Paradox of hedonism Replaceability argument Utility monster Related topics Rational choice theory Game theory Neoclassical economics Population ethics Effective altruism Philosophy portal v t e Bentham today is considered as the "Father of Utilitarianism".

[63] His ambition in life was to create a "Pannomion", a complete utilitarian code of law.

He not only proposed many legal and social reforms, but also expounded an underlying moral principle on which they should be based.

This philosophy of utilitarianism took for its "fundamental axiom" to be the notion that it is the greatest happiness of the greatest number that is the measure of right and wrong.

[64] Bentham claimed to have borrowed this concept from the writings of Joseph Priestley , [65] although the closest that Priestley in fact came to expressing it was in the form "the good and happiness of the members, that is the majority of the members of any state, is the great standard by which every thing [ sic ] relating to that state must finally be determined.

" [66] Bentham was a rare major figure in the history of philosophy to endorse psychological egoism.

[67] He was also a determined opponent of religion, as Crimmins observes: "Between 1809 and 1823 Jeremy Bentham carried out an exhaustive examination of religion with the declared aim of extirpating religious beliefs, even the idea of religion itself, from the minds of men.

" [68] Bentham also suggested a procedure for estimating the moral status of any action, which he called the hedonistic or felicific calculus.

Principle of utility The principle of utility, or " greatest happiness principle ", forms the cornerstone of all Bentham's thought.

By "happiness", he understood a predominance of "pleasure" over "pain".

He wrote in An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation : [69] Nature has placed mankind under the governance of two sovereign masters, pain and pleasure.

It is for them alone to point out what we ought to do, as well as to determine what we shall do.

On the one hand the standard of right and wrong, on the other the chain of causes and effects, are fastened to their throne.

They govern us in all we do, in all we say, in all we think.

… Bentham's Principles of Morals and Legislation focuses on the principle of utility and how this view of morality ties into legislative practices.

[70] His principle of utility regards good as that which produces the greatest amount of pleasure and the minimum amount of pain and evil as that which produces the most pain without the pleasure.

This concept of pleasure and pain is defined by Bentham as physical as well as spiritual.

Bentham writes about this principle as it manifests itself within the legislation of a society.

[70] In order to measure the extent of pain or pleasure that a certain decision will create, he lays down a set of criteria divided into the categories of intensity , duration , certainty , proximity , productiveness , purity , and extent.

[70] Using these measurements, he reviews the concept of punishment and when it should be used as far as whether a punishment will create more pleasure or more pain for a society.

He calls for legislators to determine whether punishment creates an even more evil offence.

Instead of suppressing the evil acts, Bentham argues that certain unnecessary laws and punishments could ultimately lead to new and more dangerous vices than those being punished to begin with, and calls upon legislators to measure the pleasures and pains associated with any legislation and to form laws in order to create the greatest good for the greatest number.

He argues that the concept of the individual pursuing his or her own happiness cannot be necessarily declared "right", because often these individual pursuits can lead to greater pain and less pleasure for a society as a whole.

Therefore, the legislation of a society is vital to maintain the maximum pleasure and the minimum degree of pain for the greatest number of people.

[ citation needed ] Hedonistic/felicific calculus [ edit ] In his exposition of the felicific calculus , Bentham proposed a classification of 12 pains and 14 pleasures, by which we might test the " happiness factor " of any action.

[71] For Bentham, according to P.

J.

Kelly, the law "provides the basic framework of social interaction by delimiting spheres of personal inviolability within which individuals can form and pursue their own conceptions of well-being".

[72] It provides security, a precondition for the formation of expectations.

As the hedonic calculus shows "expectation utilities" to be much higher than natural ones, it follows that Bentham does not favour the sacrifice of a few to the benefit of the many.

Law professor Alan Dershowitz has quoted Bentham to argue that torture should sometimes be permitted.

[73] Criticisms [ edit ] Utilitarianism was revised and expanded by Bentham's student John Stuart Mill , who sharply criticised Bentham's view of human nature, which failed to recognise conscience as a human motive.

Mill considered Bentham's view "to have done and to be doing very serious evil.

" [74] In Mill's hands, "Benthamism" became a major element in the liberal conception of state policy objectives.

Bentham's critics have claimed that he undermined the foundation of a free society by rejecting natural rights.

[75] Historian Gertrude Himmelfarb wrote "The principle of the greatest happiness of the greatest number was as inimical to the idea of liberty as to the idea of rights.

" [76] Bentham's "hedonistic" theory (a term from J.

J.

C.

Smart ) is often criticised for lacking a principle of fairness embodied in a conception of justice.

In Bentham and the Common Law Tradition , Gerald J.

Postema states: "No moral concept suffers more at Bentham's hand than the concept of justice.

There is no sustained, mature analysis of the notion.

" [77] Thus, some critics [ who? ] object, it would be acceptable to torture one person if this would produce an amount of happiness in other people outweighing the unhappiness of the tortured individual.

However, as P.

J.

Kelly argued in Utilitarianism and Distributive Justice: Jeremy Bentham and the Civil Law , Bentham had a theory of justice that prevented such consequences.

[ clarification needed ] Economics [ edit ] Defence of Usury , 1788 Part of a series on Hedonism Thinkers Ajita Kesakambali Jeremy Bentham John Stuart Mill Jovinian Julien Offray de La Mettrie Aristippus Epicurus Fred Feldman Theodorus the Atheist Michel Onfray Aristippus the Younger Hermarchus Lucretius Pierre Gassendi Metrodorus of Lampsacus David Pearce Zeno of Sidon Yang Zhu Torbjörn Tännsjö Esperanza Guisán Peter Singer Schools of hedonism Psychological hedonism Ethical hedonism Axiological hedonism Charvaka Cyrenaics Epicureanism Christian hedonism Utilitarianism Yangism Libertinage Key concepts Aponia Ataraxia Eudaimonia Happiness Hedone Pain Pleasure Sensation Suffering Tetrapharmakos Felicific calculus Related articles Paradox of hedonism Hedonic treadmill "Wine, women and song" Joie de vivre v t e Bentham's opinions about monetary economics were completely different from those of David Ricardo ; however, they had some similarities to those of Henry Thornton.

He focused on monetary expansion as a means of helping to create full employment.

He was also aware of the relevance of forced saving, propensity to consume , the saving-investment relationship, and other matters that form the content of modern income and employment analysis.

His monetary view was close to the fundamental concepts employed in his model of utilitarian decision making.

His work is considered to be an early precursor of modern welfare economics.

[ citation needed ] [78] Bentham stated that pleasures and pains can be ranked according to their value or "dimension" such as intensity, duration, certainty of a pleasure or a pain.

He was concerned with maxima and minima of pleasures and pains; and they set a precedent for the future employment of the maximisation principle in the economics of the consumer, the firm and the search for an optimum in welfare economics.

[79] Bentham advocated "Pauper Management" which involved the creation of a chain of large workhouses.

[80] [81] Law reform [ edit ] Bentham was the first person to be an aggressive advocate for the codification of all of the common law into a coherent set of statutes; he was actually the person who coined the verb "to codify" to refer to the process of drafting a legal code.

[82] He lobbied hard for the formation of codification commissions in both England and the United States, and went so far as to write to President James Madison in 1811 to volunteer to write a complete legal code for the young country.

After he learned more about American law and realised that most of it was state-based, he promptly wrote to the governors of every single state with the same offer.

[83] During his lifetime, Bentham's codification efforts were completely unsuccessful.

Even today, they have been completely rejected by almost every common law jurisdiction, including England.

[83] However, his writings on the subject laid the foundation for the moderately successful codification work of David Dudley Field II in the United States a generation later.

[82] Animal rights [ edit ] Bentham is widely regarded as one of the earliest proponents of animal rights.

[14] He argued and believed that the ability to suffer, not the ability to reason, should be the benchmark, or what he called the "insuperable line".

If reason alone were the criterion by which we judge who ought to have rights, human infants and adults with certain forms of disability might fall short, too.

[84] In 1780, alluding to the limited degree of legal protection afforded to slaves in the French West Indies by the Code Noir , he wrote: [84] : 309n The day has been, I am sad to say in many places it is not yet past, in which the greater part of the species, under the denomination of slaves, have been treated by the law exactly upon the same footing, as, in England for example, the inferior races of animals are still.

The day may come when the rest of the animal creation may acquire those rights which never could have been witholden from them but by the hand of tyranny.

The French have already discovered that the blackness of the skin is no reason a human being should be abandoned without redress to the caprice of a tormentor.

It may one day come to be recognised that the number of the legs, the villosity of the skin, or the termination of the os sacrum are reasons equally insufficient for abandoning a sensitive being to the same fate.

What else is it that should trace the insuperable line? Is it the faculty of reason or perhaps the faculty of discourse ? But a full-grown horse or dog, is beyond comparison a more rational, as well as a more conversable animal, than an infant of a day or a week or even a month, old.

But suppose the case were otherwise, what would it avail? The question is not, Can they reason ? nor, Can they talk ? but, Can they suffer ? Earlier in the paragraph, Bentham makes clear that he accepted that animals could be killed for food, or in defence of human life, provided that the animal was not made to suffer unnecessarily.

Bentham did not object to medical experiments on animals , providing that the experiments had in mind a particular goal of benefit to humanity, and had a reasonable chance of achieving that goal.

He wrote that otherwise he had a "decided and insuperable objection" to causing pain to animals, in part because of the harmful effects such practices might have on human beings.

In a letter to the editor of the Morning Chronicle in March 1825, he wrote: I never have seen, nor ever can see, any objection to the putting of dogs and other inferior animals to pain, in the way of medical experiment, when that experiment has a determinate object, beneficial to mankind, accompanied with a fair prospect of the accomplishment of it.

But I have a decided and insuperable objection to the putting of them to pain without any such view.

To my apprehension, every act by which, without prospect of preponderant good, pain is knowingly and willingly produced in any being whatsoever, is an act of cruelty; and, like other bad habits, the more the correspondent habit is indulged in, the stronger it grows, and the more frequently productive of its bad fruit.

I am unable to comprehend how it should be, that to him to whom it is a matter of amusement to see a dog or a horse suffer, it should not be matter of like amusement to see a man suffer; seeing, as I do, how much more morality as well as intelligence, an adult quadruped of those and many other species has in him, than any biped has for some months after he has been brought into existence; nor does it appear to me how it should be, that a person to whom the production of pain, either in the one or in the other instance, is a source of amusement, would scruple to give himself that amusement when he could do so under an assurance of impunity.

[85] Gender and sexuality [ edit ] Bentham said that it was the placing of women in a legally inferior position that made him choose in 1759, at the age of eleven, the career of a reformist, [86] though American critic John Neal claimed to have convinced him to take up women's rights issues during their association between 1825 and 1827.

[87] Bentham spoke for a complete equality between the sexes, arguing in favour of women's suffrage , a woman's right to obtain a divorce, and a woman's right to hold political office.

The c.

1785 essay "Paederasty (Offences Against One's Self)" [8] argued for the liberalisation of laws prohibiting homosexual sex.

[88] The essay remained unpublished during his lifetime for fear of offending public morality.

Some of Bentham's writings on "sexual non-conformity" were published for the first time in 1931, [9] but Paederasty was not published until 1978.

[89] Bentham does not believe homosexual acts to be unnatural, describing them merely as "irregularities of the venereal appetite".

The essay chastises the society of the time for making a disproportionate response to what Bentham appears to consider a largely private offence—public displays or forced acts being dealt with rightly by other laws.

When the essay was published in the Journal of Homosexuality in 1978, the abstract stated that Bentham's essay was the "first known argument for homosexual law reform in England".

[8] Imperialism [ edit ] Bentham's writings in the early 1790s onwards expressed an opposition to imperialism.

His 1793 pamphlet Emancipate Your Colonies! critiqued French colonialism.

In the early 1820s, he argued that the liberal government in Spain should emancipate its New World colonies.

In the essay Plan for an Universal and Perpetual Peace , Bentham argued that Britain should emancipate its New World colonies and abandon its colonial ambitions.

He argued that empire was bad for the greatest number in the metropole and the colonies.

According to Bentham, empire was financially unsound, entailed taxation on the poor in the metropole, caused unnecessary expansion in the military apparatus, undermined the security of the metropole, and were ultimately motivated by misguided ideas of honour and glory.

[90] Privacy [ edit ] For Bentham, transparency had moral value.

For example, journalism puts power-holders under moral scrutiny.

However, Bentham wanted such transparency to apply to everyone.

This he describes by picturing the world as a gymnasium in which each "gesture, every turn of limb or feature, in those whose motions have a visible impact on the general happiness, will be noticed and marked down".

[91] He considered both surveillance and transparency to be useful ways of generating understanding and improvements for people's lives.

[92] Fictional entities [ edit ] Bentham distinguished among fictional entities what he called "fabulous entities" like Prince Hamlet or a centaur , from what he termed "fictitious entities", or necessary objects of discourse, similar to Kant 's categories, [93] such as nature, custom, or the social contract.

[94] Death and the auto-icon [ edit ] Bentham's public dissection Bentham's auto-icon in a new display case at University College London's Student Centre in 2020 Bentham died on 6 June 1832, aged 84, at his residence in Queen Square Place in Westminster , London.

He had continued to write up to a month before his death, and had made careful preparations for the dissection of his body after death and its preservation as an auto-icon.

As early as 1769, when Bentham was 21 years old, he made a will leaving his body for dissection to a family friend, the physician and chemist George Fordyce , whose daughter, Maria Sophia (1765–1858), married Jeremy's brother Samuel Bentham.

[1] A paper written in 1830, instructing Thomas Southwood Smith to create the auto-icon, was attached to his last will, dated 30 May 1832.

[1] It stated: My body I give to my dear friend Dr Southwood Smith to be disposed of in a manner hereinafter mentioned, and I direct.

he will take my body under his charge and take the requisite and appropriate measures for the disposal and preservation of the several parts of my bodily frame in the manner in the paper annexed to this my will and at the top of which I have written Auto Icon.

The skeleton he will cause to be put together in such a manner that the whole figure may be seated in a chair usually occupied by me when living, in the attitude in which I am sitting while engaged in thought in the course of time occupied in writing.

I direct that the body thus prepared shall be transferred to my executor.

He will cause the skeleton to be clad in one of the suits of black occasionally worn by me.

The body so clothed, together with the chair and the staff in my later years borne by me, he will take charge of, and for containing the whole apparatus he will cause to be prepared an appropriate box or case, and will cause to be engraved in conspicuous characters on a plate to be affixed thereon and also on the labels on the glass case in which the preparations of the soft parts of my body shall be contained,.

my name at length with the letters ob: followed by the day of my decease.

If it should so happen that my personal friends and other disciples should be disposed to meet together on some day or days of the year for the purpose of commemorating the founder of the greatest happiness system of morals and legislation, my executor will from time to time cause to be conveyed in the room in which they meet the said box or case with the contents therein, to be stationed in such part of the room as to the assembled company shall seem meet.

— Queen's Square Place, Westminster, Wednesday 30 May 1832.

[95] Bentham's wish to preserve his dead body was consistent with his philosophy of utilitarianism.

In his essay Auto-Icon, or the Uses of the Dead to the Living , Bentham wrote, "If a country gentleman has rows of trees leading to his dwelling, the auto-icons of his family might alternate with the trees; copal varnish would protect the face from the effects of rain.

" [96] On 8 June 1832, two days after his death, invitations were distributed to a select group of friends, and on the following day at 3 p.

m.

, Southwood Smith delivered a lengthy oration over Bentham's remains in the Webb Street School of Anatomy & Medicine in Southwark , London.

The printed oration contains a frontispiece with an engraving of Bentham's body partly covered by a sheet.

[1] Afterward, the skeleton and head were preserved and stored in a wooden cabinet called the "auto-icon", with the skeleton padded out with hay and dressed in Bentham's clothes.

From 1833, it stood in Southwood Smith's Finsbury Square consulting rooms until he abandoned private practice in the winter of 1849–50, when it was moved to 36 Percy Street , the studio of his unofficial partner, painter Margaret Gillies , who made studies of it.

In March 1850, Southwood Smith offered the auto-icon to Henry Brougham , who readily accepted it for UCL.

[97] It is currently kept on public display at the main entrance of the UCL Student Centre.

It was previously displayed at the end of the South Cloisters in the main building of the college until it was moved in 2020.

Upon the retirement of Sir Malcolm Grant as provost of the college in 2013, however, the body was present at Grant's final council meeting.

As of 2013, this was the only time that the body of Bentham has been taken to a UCL council meeting.

[98] [99] (There is a persistent myth that the body of Bentham is present at all council meetings.

) [98] [100] Bentham had intended the auto-icon to incorporate his actual head, mummified to resemble its appearance in life.

Southwood Smith's experimental efforts at mummification, based on practices of the indigenous peoples of New Zealand and involving placing the head under an air pump over sulfuric acid and drawing off the fluids, although technically successful, left the head looking distastefully macabre, with dried and darkened skin stretched tautly over the skull.

[1] Jeremy Bentham's severed head, on temporary display at UCL The auto-icon was therefore given a wax head, fitted with some of Bentham's own hair.

The real head was displayed in the same case as the auto-icon for many years, but became the target of repeated student pranks.

It was later locked away.

[100] In 2020, the auto-icon was put into a new glass display case and moved to the entrance of UCL's new Student Centre on Gordon Square.

[101] University College London [ edit ] Henry Tonks ' imaginary scene of Bentham approving the building plans of London University Bentham is widely associated with the foundation in 1826 of London University (the institution that, in 1836, became University College London ), though he was 78 years old when the university opened and played only an indirect role in its establishment.

His direct involvement was limited to his buying a single £100 share in the new university, making him just one of over a thousand shareholders.

[102] Bentham and his ideas can nonetheless be seen as having inspired several of the actual founders of the university.

He strongly believed that education should be more widely available, particularly to those who were not wealthy or who did not belong to the established church; in Bentham's time, membership of the Church of England and the capacity to bear considerable expenses were required of students entering the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge.

As the University of London was the first in England to admit all, regardless of race , creed or political belief, it was largely consistent with Bentham's vision.

There is some evidence that, from the sidelines, he played a "more than passive part" in the planning discussions for the new institution, although it is also apparent that "his interest was greater than his influence".

[102] He failed in his efforts to see his disciple John Bowring appointed professor of English or History, but he did oversee the appointment of another pupil, John Austin , as the first professor of Jurisprudence in 1829.

The more direct associations between Bentham and UCL—the college's custody of his Auto-icon (see above) and of the majority of his surviving papers—postdate his death by some years: the papers were donated in 1849, and the Auto-icon in 1850.

A large painting by Henry Tonks hanging in UCL's Flaxman Gallery depicts Bentham approving the plans of the new university, but it was executed in 1922 and the scene is entirely imaginary.

Since 1959 (when the Bentham Committee was first established), UCL has hosted the Bentham Project, which is progressively publishing a definitive edition of Bentham's writings.

UCL now endeavours to acknowledge Bentham's influence on its foundation, while avoiding any suggestion of direct involvement, by describing him as its "spiritual founder".

[17] Bibliography [ edit ] The back of No.

19, York Street (1848).

In 1651 John Milton moved into a "pretty garden-house" in Petty France.

He lived there until the Restoration.

Later it became No.

19 York Street, belonged to Jeremy Bentham (who for a time lived next door), was occupied successively by James Mill and William Hazlitt , and finally demolished in 1877.

[103] [104] Jeremy Bentham House in Bethnal Green , East London ; a modernist apartment block named after the philosopher Bentham was an obsessive writer and reviser, but was only able on rare occasions of bringing his work to completion and publication.

[59] Most of what appeared in print in his lifetime [105] was prepared for publication by others.

Several of his works first appeared in French translation, prepared for the press by Étienne Dumont , for example, Theory of Legislation , Volume 2 ( Principles of the Penal Code ) 1840, Weeks, Jordan, & Company.

Boston.

Some made their first appearance in English in the 1820s as a result of back-translation from Dumont's 1802 collection (and redaction) of Bentham's writing on civil and penal legislation.

Publications [ edit ] 1776.

A fragment on government.

This was an unsparing criticism of some introductory passages relating to political theory in William Blackstone 's Commentaries on the Laws of England.

The book, published anonymously, was well received and credited to some of the greatest minds of the time.

Bentham disagreed with Blackstone's defence of judge-made law, his defence of legal fictions, his theological formulation of the doctrine of mixed government, his appeal to a social contract and his use of the vocabulary of natural law.

Bentham's "Fragment" was only a small part of a Commentary on the Commentaries, which remained unpublished until the twentieth century.

1776.

Short Review of the Declaration – via Wikisource.

An attack on the United States Declaration of Independence.

1780.

An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation.

London: T.

Payne and Sons.

[106] 1785 (publ.

1978).

"Offences Against One's Self", edited by L.

Crompton.

Journal of Homosexuality 3(4)389–405.

Continued in vol.

4(1).

doi : 10.

1300/J082v03n04_07.

ISSN 0091-8369.

PMID 353189.

[107] 1787.

Panopticon or the Inspection-House – via Wikisource.

1787.

Defence of Usury.

[108] A series of thirteen "Letters" addressed to Adam Smith.

1791.

"Essay on Political Tactics" (1st ed.

).

London: T.

Payne.

[109] 1796.

Anarchical Fallacies; Being an examination of the Declaration of Rights issued during the French Revolution.

[110] An attack on the Declaration of the Rights of Man decreed by the French Revolution , and critique of the natural rights philosophy underlying it.

[111] 1802.

Traités de législation civile et pénale , 3 vols, edited by Étienne Dumont.

1811.

Punishments and Rewards.

1812.

Panopticon versus New South Wales: or, the Panopticon Penitentiary System, Compared.

Includes: Two Letters to Lord Pelham, Secretary of State, Comparing the two Systems on the Ground of Expediency.

"Plea for the Constitution: Representing the Illegalities involved in the Penal Colonization System (1803, first publ.

1812) 1816.

Defence of Usury; shewing the impolicy of the present legal restraints on the terms of pecuniary bargains in a letters to a friend to which is added a letter to Adam Smith, Esq.

LL.

D.

on the discouragement opposed by the above restraints to the progress of inventive industry (3rd ed.

).

London: Payne & Foss.

Bentham wrote a series of thirteen "Letters" addressed to Adam Smith , published in 1787 as Defence of Usury.

Bentham's main argument against the restriction is that "projectors" generate positive externalities.

G.

K.

Chesterton identified Bentham's essay on usury as the very beginning of the "modern world".

Bentham's arguments were very influential.

"Writers of eminence" moved to abolish the restriction, and repeal was achieved in stages and fully achieved in England in 1854.

There is little evidence as to Smith's reaction.

He did not revise the offending passages in The Wealth of Nations (1776), but Smith made little or no substantial revisions after the third edition of 1784.

1817.

A Table of the Springs of Action.

London: sold by R.

Hunter.

1817.

"Swear Not At All" 1817.

Plan of Parliamentary Reform, in the form of Catechism with Reasons for Each Article, with An Introduction shewing the Necessity and the Inadequacy of Moderate Reform.

London: R.

Hunter.

1818.

Church-of-Englandism and its Catechism Examined.

London: Effingham Wilson.

[112] 1821.

The Elements of the Art of Packing, as applied to special juries particularly in cases of libel law.

London: Effingham Wilson.

1821.

On the Liberty of the Press, and Public Discussion.

London: Hone.

1822.

The Influence of Natural Religion upon the Temporal Happiness of Mankind , written with George Grote Published under the pseudonym Philip Beauchamp.

1823.

Not Paul But Jesus Published under the pseudonym Gamaliel Smith.

1824.

The Book of Fallacies from Unfinished Papers of Jeremy Bentham (1st ed.

).

London: John and H.

L.

Hunt.

1825.

A Treatise on Judicial Evidence Extracted from the Manuscripts of Jeremy Bentham, Esq (1st ed.

), edited by M.

Dumont.

London: Baldwin, Cradock, & Joy.

1827.

Rationale of Judicial Evidence, specially applied to English Practice, Extracted from the Manuscripts of Jeremy Bentham, Esq.

I (1st ed.

).

London: Hunt & Clarke.

1830.

Emancipate Your Colonies! Addressed to the National Convention of France A° 1793, shewing the uselessness and mischievousness of distant dependencies to a European state.

London: Robert Heward – via Wikisource.

1834.

Deontology or, The science of morality 1 , edited by J.

Bowring.

London: Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown, Green and Longman.

Posthumous publications [ edit ] On his death, Bentham left manuscripts amounting to an estimated 30 million words, which are now largely held by University College London's Special Collections ( c.

60,000 manuscript folios ) and the British Library ( c.

15,000 folios).

University College London also holds a collection of c.

500 books either by, about, or owned by Jeremy Bentham.

[113] Bowring (1838–1843) [ edit ] John Bowring , the young radical writer who had been Bentham's intimate friend and disciple, was appointed his literary executor and charged with the task of preparing a collected edition of his works.

This appeared in 11 volumes in 1838–1843.

Bowring based much of his edition on previously published texts (including those of Dumont) rather than Bentham's own manuscripts, and elected not to publish Bentham's works on religion at all.

The edition was described by the Edinburgh Review on first publication as "incomplete, incorrect and ill-arranged", and has since been repeatedly criticised both for its omissions and for errors of detail; while Bowring's memoir of Bentham's life included in volumes 10 and 11 was described by Sir Leslie Stephen as "one of the worst biographies in the language".

[114] Nevertheless, Bowring's remained the standard edition of most of Bentham's writings for over a century, and is still only partially superseded: it includes such interesting writings on international [a] relations as Bentham's A Plan for an Universal and Perpetual Peace written 1786–89, which forms part IV of the Principles of International Law.

Stark (1952–1954) [ edit ] In 1952–1954, Werner Stark published a three-volume set, Jeremy Bentham's Economic Writings , in which he attempted to bring together all of Bentham's writings on economic matters, including both published and unpublished material.

Although a significant achievement, the work is considered by scholars to be flawed in many points of detail, [115] and a new edition of the economic writings (retitled Writings on Political Economy ) is currently in course of publication by the Bentham Project.

Bentham Project (1968–present) [ edit ] Further information: The Collected Works of Jeremy Bentham and Transcribe Bentham In 1959, the Bentham Committee was established under the auspices of University College London with the aim of producing a definitive edition of Bentham's writings.

It set up the Bentham Project [116] to undertake the task, and the first volume in The Collected Works of Jeremy Bentham was published in 1968.

The Collected Works are providing many unpublished works, as well as much-improved texts of works already published.

To date, 38 volumes have appeared; the complete edition is projected to total 80.

[117] The volume Of Laws in General (1970) was found to contain many errors and has been replaced by Of the Limits of the Penal Branch of Jurisprudence (2010) [118] In 2017, Volumes 1–5 were re-published in open access by UCL Press.

[119] To assist in this task, the Bentham papers at UCL are being digitised by crowdsourcing their transcription.

Transcribe Bentham is a crowdsourced manuscript transcription project, run by University College London 's Bentham Project, [120] in partnership with UCL's UCL Centre for Digital Humanities , UCL Library Services, UCL Learning and Media Services, the University of London Computer Centre , and the online community.

The project was launched in September 2010 and is making freely available, via a specially designed transcription interface, digital images of UCL's vast Bentham Papers collection—which runs to some 60,000 manuscript folios—to engage the public and recruit volunteers to help transcribe the material.

Volunteer-produced transcripts will contribute to the Bentham Project's production of the new edition of The Collected Works of Jeremy Bentham , and will be uploaded to UCL's digital Bentham Papers repository, [121] widening access to the collection for all and ensuring its long-term preservation.

Manuscripts can be viewed and transcribed by signing-up for a transcriber account at the Transcription Desk, [122] via the Transcribe Bentham website.

[123] Free, flexible textual search of the full collection of Bentham Papers is now possible through an experimental handwritten text image indexing and search system, [124] developed by the PRHLT research center in the framework of the READ project.

See also [ edit ] List of animal rights advocates List of civil rights leaders List of liberal theorists Philosophy of happiness – Philosophical theory Rule according to higher law – Belief that universal principles of morality override unjust laws Rule of law – Political situation in which every citizen is subject to the law References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a word Bentham himself coined Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h Rosen, F.

(2014) [2004].

"Bentham, Jeremy".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.

).

Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.

1093/ref:odnb/2153.

(Subscription or UK public library membership required.

) ^ Johnson, Will (2012).

"Ancestry of Jeremy Bentham".

countyhistorian.

Retrieved 11 June 2018.

^ a b Sweet, William (n.

d.

).

"Bentham, Jeremy".

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

Retrieved 11 June 2018.

^ Sprigge, Timothy L.

S.

, ed.

(2017) [1968].

The Correspondence of Jeremy Bentham: Volume I: 1752–76 (PDF).

London: UCL Press.

pp.

xxvii, l, 294.

ISBN 978-1-911576-05-1.

^ "Jeremy Bentham".

utilitarianphilosophy.

com.

n.

d.

Archived from the original on 20 May 2017.

Retrieved 11 June 2018.

^ Bentham, Jeremy.

A Comment on the Commentaries and a Fragment on Government , edited by J.

H.

Burns and H.

L.

A.

Hart.

London: The Athlone Press.

1977.

p.

393.

^ Burns 2005 , pp.

46–61.

^ a b c Bentham 2008 , pp.

389–406.

^ a b Campos Boralevi 2012 , p.

37.

^ Bedau 1983 , pp.

1033–1065.

^ Sunstein 2004 , pp.

3–4.

^ Francione 2004 , p.

139: footnote 78 ^ Gruen 2003.

^ a b Benthall 2007 , p.

1.

^ Harrison 1995 , pp.

85–88.

^ Roberts, Roberts & Bisson 2016 , p.

307.

^ a b "UCL Academic Figures".

Archived from the original on 18 December 2010.

^ "The Oxford Dictionary of National Biography".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.

).

Oxford University Press.

2004.

doi : 10.

1093/ref:odnb/2153.

(Subscription or UK public library membership required.

) ^ "Bentham, Jeremy, 1748–1832 – Westminster School's Archive & Collections".

^ "Jeremy Bentham".

University College London.

Archived from the original on 1 January 2007.

Retrieved 4 January 2007.

^ Everett 1969 , p.

[ page needed ].

^ Stephen 2011 , pp.

174–175.

^ Dupont & Onuf 2008 , pp.

32–33.

^ Armitage 2007.

^ Anonymous 1776 , p.

3.

^ Semple 1993 , pp.

99–100.

^ Roth, Mitchel P (2006), Prisons and prison systems: a global encyclopedia , Greenwood, p.

33, ISBN 978-0313328565 ^ Semple 1993 , pp.

99–101.

^ Semple 1993 , pp.

134–140.

^ Bentham, Jeremy.

[1797] 1995.

" The Panopticon Letters ".

pp.

29–95 in The Panopticon Writings , edited by M.

Božovič.

London: Verso Books.

^ Bentham 1787.

^ Foucault 1977 , pp.

200, 249–256.

^ Schofield, Philip (2009).

Bentham: a guide for the perplexed.

London: Continuum.

pp.

90–93.

ISBN 978-0826495891.

^ Semple 1993 , p.

118.

^ Semple 1993 , pp.

102–104, 107–108.

^ Semple 1993 , pp.

108–110, 262.

^ Semple 1993 , pp.

169–189.

^ Semple 1993 , pp.

194–197.

^ Semple 1993 , pp.

197–217.

^ Semple 1993 , pp.

217–222.

^ Semple 1993 , pp.

226–231.

^ Semple 1993 , pp.

236–239.

^ Semple 1993 , p.

244.

^ Semple 1993 , pp.

265–279.

^ Semple 1993 , pp.

279–281.

^ French, Stanley (n.

d.

).

"The Early History of Thames Magistrates' Court".

Thames Police Museum.

Retrieved 14 June 2018.

^ a b Everett, Charles Warren.

1969.

Jeremy Bentham.

London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

ISBN 0297179845.

OCLC 157781.

^ Persky 2007 , p.

228.

^ Darío, Rubén (1887).

"La Literatura en Centro-América".

Revista de artes y letras (in Spanish).

XI.

Biblioteca Nacional de Chile: 591.

MC0060418.

Retrieved 25 March 2019.

In Guatemala there was Valle, a man of vast intellect, friend of Jeremías Bentham, with whom he corresponded frequently.

Bentham sent him shortly before dying a lock of his hair and a golden ring, shiny as José Cecilio's style.

^ Laura Geggel (11 September 2018).

"Oddball Philosopher Had His Mummified Body Put on Display … and Now His Rings Are Missing".

Live Science.

Retrieved 26 March 2019.

We can safely assume that [Guatemalan philosopher and politician] José del Valle received one, as he is featured wearing it in a portrait", Causer said.

"Interestingly, on the bookshelf of that portrait is one of Bentham's works, as well as a Spanish translation of Say's 'Traité d'économie politique.

' It's a neat, tangible link between Bentham, Say and del Valle.

^ Bentham, Jeremy (1843).

The Works of Jeremy Bentham: Memoirs of Bentham.

London: W.

Tait.

pp.

522–523.

^ Bentham, Jeremy (2018).

Causer, Tim; Schofield, Philip (eds.

).

Colonization Company Proposal.

London: Bentham Project, University College London.

Retrieved 8 November 2021.

^ Hamburger 1965.

^ Thomas 1979.

^ Bartle 1963.

^ "Of Sexual Irregularities by Jeremy Bentham – review".

TheGuardian.

com.

26 June 2014.

^ "Jeremy Bentham".

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

2021.

^ Packe 1954 , p.

16.

^ a b Lucas & Sheeran 2006 , pp.

26–27.

^ "Jeremy Bentham : founder of utilitarianism".

www.

utilitarianism.

com.

^ "About UCL Laws".

University College London.

2009.

Archived from the original on 20 July 2014.

Retrieved 11 April 2014.

^ "About us".

Bentham IMF Limited.

2013.

Retrieved 11 April 2014.

^ Burke, T.

Patrick (2008).

"Bentham, Jeremy (1748–1832)".

In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.

).

Nozick, Robert (1938–2002).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism.

Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications , Cato Institute.

pp.

30–31.

doi : 10.

4135/9781412965811.

n220.

ISBN 978-1412965804.

LCCN 2008009151.

OCLC 750831024.

^ Bentham 1776 , Preface (2nd para.

).

^ Bentham 1821 , p.

24.

^ Priestley 1771 , p.

17.

^ May, Joshua (n.

d.

).

"Psychological Egoism".

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

Retrieved 11 June 2018.

^ Crimmins 1986 , p.

95.

^ Bentham, Jeremy.

1780.

" Of The Principle of Utility ".

pp.

1–6 in An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation.

London: T.

Payne and Sons.

eText.

p.

1.

^ a b c Bentham, Jeremy (2005).

An introduction to the principles of morals and legislation.

[Chestnut Hill, Mass.

?]: Elibron Classics.

ISBN 1421290480.

OCLC 64578728.

^ Bentham, Jeremy.

1780.

" Value of a Lot of Pleasure or Pain, How to be Measured ".

pp.

26–29 in An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation.

London: T.

Payne and Sons.

eText.

^ Kelly 1990 , p.

81.

^ Dershowitz, Alan M.

(18 September 2014).

"A choice of evils: Should democracies use torture to protect against terrorism?".

The Boston Globe.

Retrieved 11 June 2018.

^ Mill, John Stuart.

1897.

Early Essays of John Stuart Mill.

London.

pp.

401–404.

^ Smith, George H.

(26 June 2012).

"Jeremy Bentham's Attack on Natural Rights".

Libertarianism.

org.

Retrieved 11 June 2018.

^ Himmelfarb 1968 , p.

77.

^ Postema 1986 , p.

148.

^ Collard, David.

"Research on well-being: Some advice from Jeremy Bentham".

Philosophy of the Social Sciences.

^ Spiegel 1991 , pp.

341–343.

^ Bentham, Jeremy (1843).

"Tracts on Poor Laws and Pauper Management" (PDF).

bev.

berkeley.

edu.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 August 2016.

Retrieved 27 March 2019.

^ Himmelfarb 1968 , pp.

74–75.

^ a b Morriss 1999.

^ a b Weiss 2000.

^ a b Bentham, Jeremy.

1780.

" Of the Limits of the Penal Branch of Jurisprudence ".

pp.

307–335 in An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation.

London: T.

Payne and Sons.

^ Bentham, Jeremy (9 March 1825).

"To the Editor of the Morning Chronicle".

Morning Chronicle.

London.

p.

2.

(subscription required) ^ Williford 1975 , p.

167.

^ King 1966 , p.

49.

^ Campos Boralevi 2012 , p.

40.

^ Journal of Homosexuality , v.

3:4 (1978), 389–405; continued in v.

4:1 (1978) ^ Pitts, Jennifer (2005).

A Turn to Empire: The Rise of Imperial Liberalism in Britain and France.

Princeton University Press.

pp.

107–112.

ISBN 978-1400826636.

^ Bentham 1834 , p.

101.

^ McStay, Andrew (8 November 2013).

"Why too much privacy is bad for the economy".

The Conversation.

Retrieved 25 August 2014.

^ Cutrofello 2014 , p.

115.

^ Murphy 2014 , pp.

61–62.

^ Raphael, Isabel (2009).

"Southwood Smith: his extraordinary life and family".

Camden History Review.

33 : 6.

^ Forbes, Malcolm (1988).

They Went That-a-way.

New York: Simon and Schuster.

p.

28.

ISBN 0671657097.

^ Hayes, David (2009).

"From Southwood Smith to Octavia Hill: a remarkable family's Camden years".

Camden History Review.

33 : 9.

^ a b Smallman, Etan (12 July 2013).

"Bentham's corpse attends UCL board meeting".

Metro.

Retrieved 12 June 2018.

^ Das, Subhadra (curator) (19 November 2018).

The Boring Talks [ #25 Jeremy Bentham's 'Auto-Icon' ] (podcast).

BBC.

^ a b "UCL Bentham Project".

University College London.

Archived from the original on 12 November 2010.

Retrieved 22 July 2011.

^ "Jeremy Bentham's Body Gets A Contentious New Box At UCL".

Londonist.

24 February 2020.

Retrieved 27 February 2020.

^ a b Harte 1998 , pp.

5–8.

^ Stephen 1894 , p.

32.

^ Grayling 2013 , "19 York Street".

^ Anon (n.

d.

).

"Published Works of Jeremy Bentham".

socialsciences.

mcmaster.

ca.

Retrieved 12 June 2018.

^ Bentham, Jeremy.

1780.

An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation.

London: T.

Payne and Sons.

eText.

Wikisource.

^ Bentham, Jeremy.

[1785] 2008.

" Offences Against One's Self ", edited by L.

Crompton.

Stonewall and Beyond: Lesbian and Gay Culture.

doi : 10.

1300/J082v03n04_07.

ISSN 0091-8369.

PMID 353189.

^ Bentham, Jeremy.

[1787] 2008.

" Gulphs in Mankind's Career of Prosperity: A Critique of Adam Smith on Interest Rate Restrictions ".

Econ Journal Watch 5(1):66–77.

Abstract.

^ Bentham, Jeremy.

1791.

Essay on Political Tactics: containing six of the Principal Rules proper to be observed by a Political Assembly In the process of a Forming a Decision: with the Reasons on Which They Are Grounded; and a comparative application of them to British and French Practice: Being a Fragment of a larger Work, a sketch of which is subjoined (1st ed.

).

London: T.

Payne.

^ Bowring, John , ed.

1838–1843.

The Works of Jeremy Bentham 2.

Edinburgh: William Tait.

Retrieved 5 July 2020.

^ Rights, Representation, and Reform: Nonsense upon Stilts and Other Writings on the French Revolution , edited by P.

Schofield, C.

Pease-Watkin, and C.

Blamires, eds.

Oxford: University Press.

2002.

ISBN 978-0199248636.

^ Bentham, Jeremy.

1818.

Church-of-Englandism and its Catechism Examined.

London: Effingham Wilson.

^ UCL Special Collections (23 August 2018).

"Bentham Book Collection".

UCL Special Collections.

Retrieved 12 December 2023.

^ Bartle 1963 , p.

27.

^ Schofield 2009a , pp.

475–494.

^ "Bentham Project".

Archived from the original on 24 May 2017.

Retrieved 8 June 2002.

^ Schofield, Philip (2017) [1968].

"General preface to the new editions".

In Sprigge, Timothy L.

S.

(ed.

).

The Correspondence of Jeremy Bentham, Volume 1: 1752–1776.

London: UCL Press.

p.

vi.

ISBN 978-1911576051.

^ Schofield 2013 , pp.

51–70.

^ "The Collected Works of Jeremy Bentham".

Bentham Project.

17 May 2018.

Retrieved 10 May 2024.

^ "The Bentham Project".

Ucl.

ac.

uk.

Archived from the original on 10 June 2011.

Retrieved 26 April 2012.

^ "UCL digital Bentham collection".

Ucl.

ac.

uk.

20 August 1996.

Retrieved 26 April 2012.

^ "Transcribe Bentham: Transcription Desk".

Transcribe-bentham.

da.

ulcc.

ac.

uk.

Archived from the original on 27 March 2012.

Retrieved 26 April 2012.

^ "Transcribe Bentham".

Ucl.

ac.

uk.

Retrieved 26 April 2012.

^ "PRHLT text indexing and search interface for Bentham Papers".

prhlt.

upv.

es.

Sources [ edit ] Armitage, David (2007).

The Declaration of Independence: A Global History.

Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674022829.

Bartle, G.

F.

(1963).

"Jeremy Bentham and John Bowring: a study of the relationship between Bentham and the editor of his Collected Works ".

Bulletin of the Institute of Historical Research.

36 (93): 27–35.

doi : 10.

1111/j.

1468-2281.

1963.

tb00620.

x.

Bedau, Hugo Adam (1983).

"Bentham's Utilitarian Critique of the Death Penalty".

The Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology.

74 (3): 1033–1065.

doi : 10.

2307/1143143.

JSTOR 1143143.

Benthall, Jonathan (2007).

"Animal liberation and rights".

Anthropology Today.

23 (2): 1–3.

doi : 10.

1111/j.

1467-8322.

2007.

00494.

x.

ISSN 0268-540X.

Burns, J.

H.

(2005).

"Happiness and Utility: Jeremy Bentham's Equation".

Utilitas.

17 (1): 46–61.

doi : 10.

1017/S0953820804001396.

ISSN 0953-8208.

S2CID 146209080.

Burns, J.

H.

(1989).

"Bentham and Blackstone: A Lifetime's Dialectic".

Utilitas.

1 : 22.

doi : 10.

1017/S0953820800000042.

S2CID 144397742.

Campos Boralevi, Lea (2012).

Bentham and the Oppressed.

Walter de Gruyter.

ISBN 978-3110869835.

Crimmins, James E.

(1986).

"Bentham on Religion: Atheism and the Secular Society".

Journal of the History of Ideas.

47 (1).

University of Pennsylvania Press: 95–110.

doi : 10.

2307/2709597.

JSTOR 2709597.

Crimmins, James E.

(1990).

Secular Utilitarianism: Social Science and the Critique of Religion in the Thought of Jeremy Bentham.

Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0198277415.

Cutrofello, Andrew (2014).

All for Nothing: Hamlet's Negativity.

MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0262526340.

Daggett, Windsor (1920).

A Down-East Yankee From the District of Maine.

Portland: A.

J.

Huston.

Dinwiddy, John (2004).

Bentham: selected writings of John Dinwiddy.

Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0804745208.

Dupont, Christian Y.

; Onuf, Peter S.

, eds.

(2008).

Declaring Independence: The Origin and Influence of America's Founding Document : Featuring the Albert H.

Small Declaration of Independence Collection.

Charlottesville: University of Virginia Library.

ISBN 978-0979999703.

Everett, Charles Warren (1969).

Jeremy Bentham.

London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

ISBN 0297179845.

OCLC 157781.

Follett, R.

(2000).

Evangelicalism, Penal Theory and the Politics of Criminal Law: Reform in England, 1808–30.

Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1403932761.

Foucault, Michel (1977).

Discipline and Punish: the Birth of the Prison.

Translated by Alan Sheridan.

Harmondsworth: Penguin.

ISBN 978-0140137224.

Francione, Gary (2004).

"Animals: Property or Persons".

In Sunstein, Cass R.

; Nussbaum, Martha C.

(eds.

).

Animal Rights: Current Debates and New Directions.

Oxford University Press, US.

ISBN 978-0195152173.

González, Ana Marta (2012).

Contemporary Perspectives on Natural Law: Natural Law as a Limiting Concept.

Ashgate Publishing.

ISBN 978-1409485667.

Grayling, A.

C.

(2013).

"19 York Street".

The Quarrel of the Age: The Life and Times Of William Hazlitt.

Orion.

ISBN 978-1780226798.

Gruen, Lori (1 July 2003).

"The Moral Status of Animals".

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

Gunn, J.

A.

W.

(1989).

"Jeremy Bentham and the Public Interest".

In Lively, J.

; Reeve, A.

(eds.

).

Modern Political Theory from Hobbes to Marx: Key Debates.

London: Routledge.

pp.

199–219.

ISBN 978-0415013512.

Hamburger, Joseph (1965).

Intellectuals in Politics: John Stuart Mill and the Philosophic Radicals.

Yale University Press.

Harris, Jonathan (1998).

"Bernardino Rivadavia and Benthamite 'discipleship' ".

Latin American Research Review.

33 : 129–149.

doi : 10.

1017/S0023879100035780.

S2CID 252743662.

Harrison, Ross (1983).

Bentham.

London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

ISBN 0710095260.

Harrison, Ross (1995).

"Jeremy Bentham".

In Honderich, Ted (ed.

).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy.

Oxford University Press.

pp.

85–88.

Archived from the original on 29 January 2017.

Retrieved 23 November 2007.

Hart, Jenifer (July 1965).

"Nineteenth-Century Social Reform: A Tory Interpretation of History".

Past & Present (31): 39–61.

doi : 10.

1093/past/31.

1.

39.

JSTOR 650101.

Harte, Negley (1998).

"The owner of share no.

633: Jeremy Bentham and University College London".

In Fuller, Catherine (ed.

).

The Old Radical: representations of Jeremy Bentham.

London: University College London.

Himmelfarb, Gertrude (1968).

Victorian Minds.

New York: Knopf.

Kelly, Paul J.

(1990).

Utilitarianism and distributive justice: Jeremy Bentham and the civil law.

Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0198254188.

King, Peter J.

(March 1966).

"John Neal as a Benthamite".

The New England Quarterly.

39 (1): 47–65.

doi : 10.

2307/363641.

JSTOR 363641.

Anonymous (1776).

An Answer to the Declaration of the American Congress.

London: T.

Cadell.

Lease, Benjamin (1972).

That Wild Fellow John Neal and the American Literary Revolution.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0226469697.

Lucas, Philip; Sheeran, Anne (2006).

"Asperger's Syndrome and the Eccentricity and Genius of Jeremy Bentham" (PDF).

Journal of Bentham Studies.

8.

doi : 10.

14324/111.

2045-757X.

027.

S2CID 58729643.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 April 2012.

Morriss, Andrew P.

(1999).

"Codification and Right Answers".

Chic.

-Kent L.

Rev.

74 : 355.

McStay, Andrew (2014).

Privacy and Philosophy: New Media and Affective Protocol.

Peter Lang.

ISBN 978-1433118982.

Murphy, James Bernard (2014).

The Philosophy of Customary Law.

Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199370627.

Packe, Michael St.

John (1954).

The Life of John Stuart Mill.

London: Secker and Warburg.

Persky, Joseph (1 January 2007).

"Retrospectives: From Usury to Interest".

The Journal of Economic Perspectives.

21 (1): 228.

doi : 10.

1257/jep.

21.

1.

227.

JSTOR 30033709.

Postema, Gerald J.

(1986).

Bentham and the Common Law Tradition.

Oxford U.

P.

ISBN 978-0198255055.

Priestley, Joseph (1771).

An Essay on the First Principles of Government: And on the Nature of Political, Civil, and Religious Liberty.

London: J.

Johnson.

Roberts, Clayton; Roberts, David F.

; Bisson, Douglas (2016).

A History of England.

Vol.

II: 1688 to the Present (6th ed.

).

London and New York: Routledge.

p.

307.

ISBN 978-1315509600.

Robinson, Dave; Groves, Judy (2003).

Introducing Political Philosophy.

Cambridge: Icon Books.

ISBN 184046450X.

Rosen, F.

(1983).

Jeremy Bentham and Representative Democracy: A Study of the "Constitutional Code".

Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 019822656X.

Rosen, Frederick (1990).

"The Origins of Liberal Utilitarianism: Jeremy Bentham and Liberty".

In Bellamy, R.

(ed.

).

Victorian Liberalism: Nineteenth-century Political Thought and Practice.

London: Routledge.

p.

5870.

Rosen, Frederick (1992).

Bentham, Byron, and Greece: constitutionalism, nationalism, and early liberal political thought.

Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0198200781.

Rosen, Frederick, ed.

(2007).

Jeremy Bentham.

Aldershot: Ashgate.

ISBN 978-0754625667.

Schofield, Philip (2006).

Utility and Democracy: The Political Thought of Jeremy Bentham.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0198208563.

Schofield, Philip (2009).

Bentham: a guide for the perplexed.

London: Continuum.

ISBN 978-0826495891.

Schofield, Philip (2009a).

"Werner Stark and Jeremy Bentham's Economic Writings".

History of European Ideas.

35 (4): 475–494.

doi : 10.

1016/j.

histeuroideas.

2009.

05.

003.

S2CID 144165469.

Schofield, Philip (2013).

"The Legal and Political Legacy of Jeremy Bentham".

Annual Review of Law and Social Science.

9 (1): 51–70.

doi : 10.

1146/annurev-lawsocsci-102612-134101.

Semple, Janet (1993).

Bentham's Prison: a Study of the Panopticon Penitentiary.

Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0198273878.

Spiegel, Henry William (1991).

The Growth of Economic Thought (3rd ed.

).

Duke University Press.

ISBN 08223-09734.

Stephen, Leslie (1894).

"Milton, John (1608–1674)".

In Lee, Sidney (ed.

).

Dictionary of National Biography.

Vol.

38.

London: Smith, Elder & Co.

p.

32.

Stephen, Leslie (2011).

The English Utilitarians.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1108041003.

Sunstein, Cass R.

(2004).

"Animal Rights".

In Sunstein, Cass R.

; Nussbaum, Martha C.

(eds.

).

Animal Rights: Current Debates and New Directions.

Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195152173.

Thomas, William (1979).

The Philosophic Radicals: Nine Studies in Theory and Practice, 1817–1841.

Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0198224907.

Twining, William (1985).

Theories of Evidence: Bentham and Wigmore.

Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 0804712859.

Vergara, Francisco (1998).

"A Critique of Elie Halévy; refutation of an important distortion of British moral philosophy" (PDF).

Philosophy.

73 (1).

London: Royal Institute of Philosophy: 97–111.

doi : 10.

1017/s0031819197000144.

S2CID 170370954.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 March 2016.

Vergara, Francisco (2011).

"Bentham and Mill on the "Quality" of Pleasures".

Revue d'études benthamiennes (9).

Paris.

doi : 10.

4000/etudes-benthamiennes.

422.

ISSN 1760-7507.

Weiss, Gunther A.

(2000).

"The Enchantment of Codification in the Common-Law World".

The Yale Journal of International Law.

25 (2): 435–532.

Retrieved 3 September 2021.

Williford, Miriam (1975).

"Bentham on the Rights of Women".

Journal of the History of Ideas.

36 (1): 167–176.

doi : 10.

2307/2709019.

ISSN 0022-5037.

JSTOR 2709019.

Further reading [ edit ] Herbermann, Charles, ed.

(1913).

"Benthamism".

Catholic Encyclopedia.

New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Chisholm, Hugh , ed.

(1911).

"Bentham, Jeremy".

Encyclopædia Britannica.

Vol.

3 (11th ed.

).

Cambridge University Press.

Macdonell, John (1885).

"Bentham, Jeremy".

In Stephen, Leslie (ed.

).

Dictionary of National Biography.

Vol.

4.

London: Smith, Elder & Co.

Jeremy Bentham, "Critique of the Doctrine of Inalienable, Natural Rights" , in Anarchical Fallacies , vol.

2 of Bowring (ed.

), Works , 1843.

Jeremy Bentham, "Offences Against One's Self: Paederasty" , c.

1785, free audiobook from LibriVox.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jeremy Bentham.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Jeremy Bentham.

Wikisource has original works by or about: Jeremy Bentham Portraits of Jeremy Bentham at the National Portrait Gallery, London Works by Jeremy Bentham at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Jeremy Bentham at Internet Archive Works by Jeremy Bentham at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Transcribe Bentham , initiative run by the Bentham Project that has its own website with useful links.

The curious case of Jeremy Bentham at Random-Times.

com Jeremy Bentham , categorised links The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Archived 12 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine has an extensive biographical reference of Bentham.

"Jeremy Bentham at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe 2007" Archived 30 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine A play-reading of the life and legacy of Jeremy Bentham.

Jeremy Bentham , biographical profile, including quotes and further resources, at Utilitarianism.

net Bentham Book Collection at University College London Bentham Papers at University College London Links to related articles v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Discourse Engineering Environmental Legal Machine Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Authority Autonomy Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Political freedom Precept Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Trust Value Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Laozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Valluvar Cicero Confucius Augustine Mencius Mozi Xunzi Aquinas Spinoza Hume Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c.

322 BC) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1784) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Secular ethics Social philosophy Index Category v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic liberalism Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state State of nature Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Democratic Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Related topics Anti-authoritarianism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical centrism Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal v t e Animal rights Topics (overviews, concepts, issues, cases) Overviews Animal rights movement Animal rights by country or territory Anarchism and animal rights Animal rights and punk subculture Animal cruelty–Holocaust analogies Animal rights in Indian religions Christianity and animal rights History of animal rights List of international animal welfare conventions Moral status of animals in the ancient world Timeline of animal welfare and rights Total liberation Universal Declaration on Animal Welfare Concepts Abolitionism Ahimsa Animal cognition Animal consciousness Animal ethics Animal–industrial complex Animal law Animal protectionism Animal welfare Animal-free agriculture Anthrozoology Argument from marginal cases Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness Carnism Equal consideration of interests Emotion in animals Ethics of eating meat Ethics of uncertain sentience Ethology Insects in ethics Meat paradox Nonviolence Open rescue Opposition to hunting Personism Replaceability argument Sentiocentrism Speciesism Veganism Vegaphobia Vegetarianism Issues Animal agriculture Animal product Battery cage Bile bear Chick culling Concentrated animal feeding operation Fish farming Fur farming Fur trade Insect farming Intensive animal farming Intensive pig farming Livestock Poultry farming Slaughterhouse Wildlife farming Working animal Feedback (pork industry) Foam depopulation Ventilation shutdown Animal testing Alternatives to animal testing Animal testing on non-human primates Animal testing regulations Labcorp Drug Development Great ape research ban Green Scare Huntingdon Life Sciences Model organism Nafovanny Operation Backfire Vivisection Animal welfare Animal euthanasia Cruelty to animals Pain in animals Pain in amphibians Pain in cephalopods Pain in crustaceans Pain in fish Pain in invertebrates Pain and suffering in laboratory animals Welfare of farmed insects Fishing Commercial fishing Fishing bait Recreational fishing Wild animals Culling wildlife Hare coursing Hunting International primate trade Ivory trade Predation problem Seal hunting Wild animal suffering Wildlife management Other Abandoned pets Animal sacrifice Animal slaughter Animal trial Animals in sport Live food Live export Cases Brown Dog affair Cambridge University primates McLibel case Monkey selfie copyright dispute Pit of despair SHAC Silver Spring monkeys University of California, Riverside 1985 laboratory raid Unnecessary Fuss War of the currents Methodologies Direct Action Everywhere Hunt sabotage Observances World Animal Day World Day for the End of Speciesism World Day for Laboratory Animals World Day for the End of Fishing Advocates (academics, writers, activists) Academics and writers Contemporary Carol J.

Adams Aysha Akhtar Kristin Andrews Tom Beauchamp Marc Bekoff Steven Best Stephen St.

C.

Bostock Paola Cavalieri Stephen R.

L.

Clark Alasdair Cochrane J.

M.

Coetzee Alice Crary David DeGrazia Daniel Dombrowski Sue Donaldson Josephine Donovan Joan Dunayer Mylan Engel Catia Faria Lawrence Finsen Gary L.

Francione Robert Garner Valéry Giroux Lori Gruen John Hadley Oscar Horta Dale Jamieson Kyle Johannsen Melanie Joy Hilda Kean Will Kymlicka Renan Larue Thomas Lepeltier Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Dan Lyons David Nibert Martha Nussbaum Clare Palmer Charles Patterson David Pearce Jessica Pierce Evelyn Pluhar Mark Rowlands Richard D.

Ryder Steve F.

Sapontzis Jeff Sebo Jérôme Segal Peter Singer Gary Steiner Cass Sunstein David Sztybel Michael Tye Tatjana Višak Paul Waldau Corey Lee Wrenn Historical Jeremy Bentham David Renaud Boullier Brigid Brophy Peter Buchan Mona Caird Priscilla Cohn Henry Crowe Herman Daggett Richard Dean Wilhelm Dietler William Hamilton Drummond Edward Payson Evans Thomas Ignatius Maria Forster John Galsworthy Thomas G.

Gentry Arthur Helps John Hildrop John Zephaniah Holwell Soame Jenyns Karl Christian Friedrich Krause John Lawrence Charles R.

Magel Jean Meslier Mary Midgley J.

Howard Moore José Ferrater Mora Leonard Nelson Edward Nicholson Siobhan O'Sullivan Rod Preece Humphrey Primatt James Rachels Tom Regan Nathaniel Peabody Rogers Bernard Rollin Henry Stephens Salt Arthur Schopenhauer Laurids Smith John Styles Thomas Tryon Gary Varner Johann Friedrich Ludwig Volckmann Mary Anne Warren Adam Gottlieb Weigen Johann Heinrich Winckler Steven M.

Wise Jon Wynne-Tyson Activists Contemporary James Aspey Greg Avery Matt Ball Martin Balluch Carole Baskin Barbi Twins Brigitte Bardot Gene Baur Yves Bonnardel Joey Carbstrong Aymeric Caron Jake Conroy Rod Coronado Karen Dawn Chris DeRose John Feldmann Bruce Friedrich Juliet Gellatley Tal Gilboa Antoine Goetschel Mark Gold Brigitte Gothière Wayne Hsiung Charlotte Laws Ronnie Lee Howard Lyman Evanna Lynch Bill Maher Keith Mann Jim Mason Dan Mathews Jo-Anne McArthur Luísa Mell Virginia McKenna Ingrid Newkirk Heather Nicholson Jack Norris Ric O'Barry David Olivier Alex Pacheco Craig Rosebraugh Nathan Runkle Jasmin Singer Kim Stallwood Lynda Stoner Marianne Thieme Darren Thurston Christine Townend Wendy Turner-Webster Jerry Vlasak Louise Wallis Gary Yourofsky That Vegan Teacher Historical Cleveland Amory Henry B.

Amos Bob Barker Ernest Bell Edith Carrington Frances Power Cobbe Joan Court Karen Davis Royal Dixon Muriel Dowding Elizabeth Farians Emarel Freshel André Géraud Lewis Gompertz James Granger Nina Douglas-Hamilton Barry Horne Marie Huot Lizzy Lind af Hageby Jessie Mackay Norm Phelps Jill Phipps Maud Ingersoll Probasco Hans Ruesch Nell Shipman Henry Spira Andrew Tyler Gretchen Wyler Movement (groups, parties) Groups Contemporary American Anti-Vivisection Society Animal Aid Animal Ethics Animal Justice Animal Justice Project Animal Legal Defense Fund Animal Liberation Animal Liberation Front Animal Rising AnimaNaturalis Anti-Vivisection Coalition Anonymous for the Voiceless Beauty Without Cruelty Born Free Foundation Centre for Animals and Social Justice Chinese Animal Protection Network Cruelty Free International Direct Action Everywhere Doctors Against Animal Experiments Equanimal Every Animal Farm Animal Rights Movement Faunalytics Great Ape Project Hunt Saboteurs Association In Defense of Animals Korea Animal Rights Advocates L214 Last Chance for Animals Massachusetts Animal Rights Coalition Mercy for Animals Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Rise for Animals Sentience Politics Uncaged Campaigns United Activists for Animal Rights United Poultry Concerns UPF-Centre for Animal Ethics Viva! Voice for Animals Humane Society Historical Animal Defence and Anti-Vivisection Society Canadian Anti-Vivisection Society Humanitarian League (1891–1919) Oxford Group Parties Animal Justice Party (Australia) Animal Politics EU (Europe) Animal Protection Party of Canada (Canada) Animal Justice Party of Finland (Finland) Animals' Party (Sweden) Animalist Movement (Italy) Animalist Party Against Mistreatment of Animals (Spain) DierAnimal (Belgium) Human Environment Animal Protection (Germany) Italian Animalist Party (Italy) Party for the Animals (Netherlands) People Animals Nature (Portugal) V-Partei³ (Germany) Activism Animal Rights National Conference Media (books, films, periodicals, albums) Books On Abstinence from Eating Animals (3rd century) Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) The Rights of Animals (1838) Animals' Rights (1892) Evolutional Ethics and Animal Psychology (1897) The Universal Kinship (1906) The New Ethics (1907) Animals, Men and Morals (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) The Case for Animal Rights (1983) Morals, Reason, and Animals (1987) Zoos and Animal Rights (1993) Animals, Property, and the Law (1995) The Lives of Animals (1999) Eternal Treblinka (2001) Do Animals Have Rights? (2005) Striking at the Roots (2008) An American Trilogy (2009) An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory (2010) Animal Rights Without Liberation (2012) Political Animals and Animal Politics (2014) Animal (De)liberation (2016) Sentientist Politics (2018) Wild Animal Ethics (2020) Animal Ethics in the Wild (2022) Making a Stand for Animals (2022) Films The Animals Film (1981) A Cow at My Table (1998) Shores of Silence (2000) The Witness (2000) Meet Your Meat (2002) Legally Blonde 2 (2003) The Meatrix (2003) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) Behind the Mask (2006) Your Mommy Kills Animals (2007) The Cove (2009) Peaceable Kingdom: The Journey Home (2009) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) An Apology to Elephants (2013) Speciesism: The Movie (2013) The Ghosts in Our Machine (2013) Unlocking the Cage (2016) Dominion (2018) Seaspiracy (2021) Periodicals Journals Animal Sentience Between the Species Cahiers antispécistes Etica & Animali Journal of Animal Ethics Relations.

Beyond Anthropocentrism The Animals' Defender Magazines Arkangel Bite Back Muutoksen kevät No Compromise Satya Albums Animal Liberation (1987) Tame Yourself (1991) Manifesto (2008) Salvation of Innocents (2014) Onward to Freedom (2014) Fairs and exhibitions Holocaust on your Plate (2003) Category ( 139 ) v t e Jurisprudence Index Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Marx Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Walzer Weber Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes v t e Social philosophy Concepts Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Augustine Cicero Confucius Lactantius Laozi Mencius Mozi Origen Philo Plato Plutarch Polybius Tertullian Thucydides Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Dante Gelasius Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Muhammad Photios Plethon Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Oligarchy Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Alpharabius Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal political philosophy Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c.

375 BC) Politics (c.

350 BC) De re publica (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c.

1274) Monarchia (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Machiavellianism Philosophy of law Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Index Category:Political philosophy v t e Classical economists Francis Hutcheson Bernard Mandeville David Hume Adam Smith Anders Chydenius Jean-Baptiste Say Thomas Malthus James Mill Francis Place David Ricardo Henry Thornton John Ramsay McCulloch James Maitland, 8th Earl of Lauderdale Jeremy Bentham Jean Charles Léonard de Sismondi Johann Heinrich von Thünen John Stuart Mill Nassau William Senior Edward Gibbon Wakefield Frédéric Bastiat Thomas Tooke Robert Torrens v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Maior Micu-Klein Șincai Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Newton Playfair Reid Smith Stewart United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases International FAST ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Norway Chile Spain France BnF data Argentina Catalonia Germany Italy Israel United States Sweden Latvia Japan Czech Republic Australia 2 Greece Korea Croatia Netherlands Poland Portugal Vatican Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie Trove 2 Other SNAC IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.

wikipedia.

org/w/index.

php?title=Jeremy_Bentham&oldid=1234439965 " Categories : Jeremy Bentham 1748 births 1832 deaths 18th century in LGBT history 18th-century atheists 18th-century British philosophers 18th-century English male writers 18th-century English non-fiction writers 19th century in LGBT history 19th-century atheists 19th-century British philosophers 19th-century English writers 19th-century male writers Alumni of the Queen's College, Oxford Animal rights scholars Atheist philosophers British critics of religions British epistemologists British ethicists British feminists British liberal theorists British male feminists British radicals British social liberals British social reformers British women's rights activists Child classical musicians Church of England disestablishment Consequentialists English animal rights activists English atheists English feminists English human rights activists English legal writers English LGBT rights activists English logicians English male non-fiction writers English philosophers English political philosophers English republicans English suffragists History of University College London Human taxidermy LGBT history in the United Kingdom Mummies Ontologists People associated with University College London People educated at Westminster School, London People from the City of London Philosophers of culture Philosophers of economics Philosophers of law Philosophers of logic Philosophers of mind Philosophy writers Social philosophers Utilitarians Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages using cite ODNB with id parameter Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2023 CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata EngvarB from July 2023 Use dmy dates from June 2022 Biography with signature Articles with hCards All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2018 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2013 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2021 CS1: long volume value Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia without Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Commons link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles with FAST identifiers Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with WorldCat Entities identifiers Articles with BIBSYS identifiers Articles with BNC identifiers Articles with BNE identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with BNMM identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with GND identifiers Articles with ICCU identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with Libris identifiers Articles with LNB identifiers Articles with NDL identifiers Articles with NKC identifiers Articles with NLA identifiers Articles with NLG identifiers Articles with NLK identifiers Articles with NSK identifiers Articles with NTA identifiers Articles with PLWABN identifiers Articles with PortugalA identifiers Articles with VcBA identifiers Articles with CINII identifiers Articles with DTBIO identifiers Articles with Trove identifiers Articles with SNAC-ID identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 14 July 2024, at 10:50 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.

0 ; additional terms may apply.

By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view.