Mathematics education - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.

1 Ancient 1.

1.

1 Pythagorean theorem 1.

2 Medieval and early modern 1.

3 Modern 2 Objectives 3 Methods 4 Content and age levels 5 Standards 6 Research Toggle Research subsection 6.

1 Important results [39] 6.

2 Conceptual understanding [39] 6.

3 Formative assessment [41] 6.

4 Homework [42] 6.

5 Students with difficulties [42] 6.

6 Algebraic reasoning [42] 6.

7 Methodology 6.

7.

1 Randomized trials 7 Organizations 8 See also Toggle See also subsection 8.

1 Aspects of mathematics education 8.

2 North American issues 8.

3 Mathematical difficulties 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Mathematics education 21 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Español Euskara Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia עברית Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Teaching, learning, and scholarly research in mathematics A child calculating with his fingers (2006) Educational research Disciplines Curriculum studies Education sciences Evaluation History Philosophy Psychology ( school ) Technology International education School counseling Special education Gifted education Female education Religious education Teacher education Teaching method Curricular domains Arts Business Computer science Early childhood Engineering Language Literacy Mathematics Performing arts Science Social science Technology Vocational Methods Case method Conversation analysis Discourse analysis Evidence-based Factor analysis Factorial experiment Focus group Meta-analysis Multivariate statistics Participant observation Reform v t e Part of a series on Mathematics History Index Areas Number theory Geometry Algebra Calculus and Analysis Discrete mathematics Logic and Set theory Probability Statistics and Decision theory Relationship with sciences Physics Chemistry Geosciences Computation Biology Linguistics Economics Philosophy Education Mathematics Portal v t e In contemporary education , mathematics education —known in Europe as the didactics or pedagogy of mathematics —is the practice of teaching , learning , and carrying out scholarly research into the transfer of mathematical knowledge.

Although research into mathematics education is primarily concerned with the tools, methods, and approaches that facilitate practice or the study of practice, it also covers an extensive field of study encompassing a variety of different concepts, theories and methods.

National and international organisations regularly hold conferences and publish literature in order to improve mathematics education.

History [ edit ] Ancient [ edit ] Elementary mathematics were a core part of education in many ancient civilisations, including ancient Egypt , ancient Babylonia , ancient Greece , ancient Rome , and Vedic India.

[ citation needed ] In most cases, formal education was only available to male children with sufficiently high status, wealth, or caste.

[ citation needed ] The oldest known mathematics textbook is the Rhind papyrus , dated from circa 1650 BCE.

[1] Pythagorean theorem [ edit ] Historians of Mesopotamia have confirmed that use of the Pythagorean rule dates back to the Old Babylonian Empire (20th–16th centuries BC) and that it was being taught in scribal schools over one thousand years before the birth of Pythagoras.

[2] [3] [4] [5] [6] In Plato 's division of the liberal arts into the trivium and the quadrivium , the quadrivium included the mathematical fields of arithmetic and geometry.

This structure was continued in the structure of classical education that was developed in medieval Europe.

The teaching of geometry was almost universally based on Euclid's Elements.

Apprentices to trades such as masons, merchants, and moneylenders could expect to learn such practical mathematics as was relevant to their profession.

Medieval and early modern [ edit ] Illustration at the beginning of a 14th-century translation of Euclid's Elements In the Middle Ages , the academic status of mathematics declined, because it was strongly associated with trade and commerce, and considered somewhat un-Christian.

[7] Although it continued to be taught in European universities , it was seen as subservient to the study of natural , metaphysical , and moral philosophy.

The first modern arithmetic curriculum (starting with addition , then subtraction , multiplication , and division ) arose at reckoning schools in Italy in the 1300s.

[8] Spreading along trade routes, these methods were designed to be used in commerce.

They contrasted with Platonic math taught at universities, which was more philosophical and concerned numbers as concepts rather than calculating methods.

[8] They also contrasted with mathematical methods learned by artisan apprentices, which were specific to the tasks and tools at hand.

For example, the division of a board into thirds can be accomplished with a piece of string, instead of measuring the length and using the arithmetic operation of division.

[7] The first mathematics textbooks to be written in English and French were published by Robert Recorde , beginning with The Grounde of Artes in 1543.

However, there are many different writings on mathematics and mathematics methodology that date back to 1800 BCE.

These were mostly located in Mesopotamia, where the Sumerians were practicing multiplication and division.

There are also artifacts demonstrating their methodology for solving equations like the quadratic equation.

After the Sumerians, some of the most famous ancient works on mathematics came from Egypt in the form of the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus and the Moscow Mathematical Papyrus.

The more famous Rhind Papyrus has been dated back to approximately 1650 BCE, but it is thought to be a copy of an even older scroll.

This papyrus was essentially an early textbook for Egyptian students.

The social status of mathematical study was improving by the seventeenth century, with the University of Aberdeen creating a Mathematics Chair in 1613, followed by the Chair in Geometry being set up in University of Oxford in 1619 and the Lucasian Chair of Mathematics being established by the University of Cambridge in 1662.

Modern [ edit ] In the 18th and 19th centuries, the Industrial Revolution led to an enormous increase in urban populations.

Basic numeracy skills, such as the ability to tell the time, count money, and carry out simple arithmetic , became essential in this new urban lifestyle.

Within the new public education systems, mathematics became a central part of the curriculum from an early age.

By the twentieth century, mathematics was part of the core curriculum in all developed countries.

During the twentieth century, mathematics education was established as an independent field of research.

Main events in this development include the following: In 1893, a Chair in mathematics education was created at the University of Göttingen, under the administration of Felix Klein.

The International Commission on Mathematical Instruction (ICMI) was founded in 1908, and Felix Klein became the first president of the organisation.

The professional periodical literature on mathematics education in the United States had generated more than 4,000 articles after 1920, so in 1941 William L.

Schaaf published a classified index , sorting them into their various subjects.

[9] A renewed interest in mathematics education emerged in the 1960s, and the International Commission was revitalized.

In 1968, the Shell Centre for Mathematical Education was established in Nottingham.

The first International Congress on Mathematical Education (ICME) was held in Lyon in 1969.

The second congress was in Exeter in 1972, and after that, it has been held every four years.

Midway through the twentieth century, the cultural impact of the " electronic age " (McLuhan) was also taken up by educational theory and the teaching of mathematics.

While previous approach focused on "working with specialized 'problems' in arithmetic ", the emerging structural approach to knowledge had "small children meditating about number theory and ' sets '.

" [10] Since the 1980s, there have been a number of efforts to reform the traditional curriculum, which focuses on continuous mathematics and relegates even some basic discrete concepts to advanced study, to better balance coverage of the continuous and discrete sides of the subject: [11] In the 1980s and early 1990s, there was a push to make discrete mathematics more available at the post-secondary level; From the late 1980s into the new millennium, countries like the US began to identify and standardize sets of discrete mathematics topics for primary and secondary education; Concurrently, academics began compiling practical advice on introducing discrete math topics into the classroom; Researchers continued arguing the urgency of making the transition throughout the 2000s; and In parallel, some textbook authors began working on materials explicitly designed to provide more balance.

Similar efforts are also underway to shift more focus to mathematical modeling as well as its relationship to discrete math.

[12] Objectives [ edit ] Boy doing sums, Guinea-Bissau, 1974 At different times and in different cultures and countries, mathematics education has attempted to achieve a variety of different objectives.

These objectives have included: The teaching and learning of basic numeracy skills to all students [13] The teaching of practical mathematics ( arithmetic , elementary algebra , plane and solid geometry , trigonometry , probability , statistics ) to most students, to equip them to follow a trade or craft and to understand mathematics commonly used in news and Internet (such as percentages , charts , probability , and statistics ) The teaching of abstract mathematical concepts (such as set and function ) at an early age The teaching of selected areas of mathematics (such as Euclidean geometry ) [14] as an example of an axiomatic system [15] and a model of deductive reasoning The teaching of selected areas of mathematics (such as calculus ) as an example of the intellectual achievements of the modern world The teaching of advanced mathematics to those students who wish to follow a career in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields The teaching of heuristics [16] and other problem-solving strategies to solve non-routine problems The teaching of mathematics in social sciences and actuarial sciences , as well as in some selected arts under liberal arts education in liberal arts colleges or universities Methods [ edit ] The method or methods used in any particular context are largely determined by the objectives that the relevant educational system is trying to achieve.

Methods of teaching mathematics include the following: Games can motivate students to improve skills that are usually learned by rote.

In "Number Bingo," players roll 3 dice, then perform basic mathematical operations on those numbers to get a new number, which they cover on the board trying to cover 4 squares in a row.

This game was played at a "Discovery Day" organized by Big Brother Mouse in Laos.

Computer-based math : an approach based on the use of mathematical software as the primary tool of computation.

Computer-based mathematics education : involves the use of computers to teach mathematics.

Mobile applications have also been developed to help students learn mathematics.

[17] [18] [19] Classical education : the teaching of mathematics within the quadrivium , part of the classical education curriculum of the Middle Ages , which was typically based on Euclid's Elements taught as a paradigm of deductive reasoning.

[20] Conventional approach : the gradual and systematic guiding through the hierarchy of mathematical notions, ideas and techniques.

Starts with arithmetic and is followed by Euclidean geometry and elementary algebra taught concurrently.

Requires the instructor to be well informed about elementary mathematics since didactic and curriculum decisions are often dictated by the logic of the subject rather than pedagogical considerations.

Other methods emerge by emphasizing some aspects of this approach.

Relational approach : uses class topics to solve everyday problems and relates the topic to current events.

[21] This approach focuses on the many uses of mathematics and helps students understand why they need to know it as well as helps them to apply mathematics to real-world situations outside of the classroom.

Historical method : teaching the development of mathematics within a historical, social, and cultural context.

Proponents argue it provides more human interest than the conventional approach.

[22] Discovery math : a constructivist method of teaching ( discovery learning ) mathematics which centres around problem-based or inquiry-based learning, with the use of open-ended questions and manipulative tools.

[23] This type of mathematics education was implemented in various parts of Canada beginning in 2005.

[24] Discovery-based mathematics is at the forefront of the Canadian " math wars " debate with many criticizing it for declining math scores.

New Math : a method of teaching mathematics which focuses on abstract concepts such as set theory , functions , and bases other than ten.

Adopted in the US as a response to the challenge of early Soviet technical superiority in space, it began to be challenged in the late 1960s.

One of the most influential critiques of the New Math was Morris Kline 's 1973 book Why Johnny Can't Add.

The New Math method was the topic of one of Tom Lehrer 's most popular parody songs, with his introductory remarks to the song: ".

in the new approach, as you know, the important thing is to understand what you're doing, rather than to get the right answer.

" Recreational mathematics : mathematical problems that are fun can motivate students to learn mathematics and can increase their enjoyment of mathematics.

[25] Standards-based mathematics : a vision for pre-college mathematics education in the United States and Canada , focused on deepening student understanding of mathematical ideas and procedures, and formalized by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics which created the Principles and Standards for School Mathematics.

Mastery : an approach in which most students are expected to achieve a high level of competence before progressing.

Problem solving : the cultivation of mathematical ingenuity, creativity , and heuristic thinking by setting students open-ended, unusual, and sometimes unsolved problems.

The problems can range from simple word problems to problems from international mathematics competitions such as the International Mathematical Olympiad.

Problem-solving is used as a means to build new mathematical knowledge, typically by building on students' prior understandings.

Exercises : the reinforcement of mathematical skills by completing large numbers of exercises of a similar type, such as adding simple fractions or solving quadratic equations.

Rote learning : the teaching of mathematical results, definitions and concepts by repetition and memorisation typically without meaning or supported by mathematical reasoning.

A derisory term is drill and kill.

In traditional education , rote learning is used to teach multiplication tables , definitions, formulas, and other aspects of mathematics.

Math walk : a walk where experience of perceived objects and scenes is translated into mathematical language.

Content and age levels [ edit ] A mathematics lecture at Aalto University School of Science and Technology Different levels of mathematics are taught at different ages and in somewhat different sequences in different countries.

Sometimes a class may be taught at an earlier age than typical as a special or honors class.

Elementary mathematics in most countries is taught similarly, though there are differences.

Most countries tend to cover fewer topics in greater depth than in the United States.

[26] During the primary school years, children learn about whole numbers and arithmetic, including addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.

[27] Comparisons and measurement are taught, in both numeric and pictorial form, as well as fractions and proportionality , patterns, and various topics related to geometry.

[28] At high school level in most of the US, algebra , geometry , and analysis ( pre-calculus and calculus ) are taught as separate courses in different years.

On the other hand, in most other countries (and in a few US states), mathematics is taught as an integrated subject, with topics from all branches of mathematics studied every year; students thus undertake a pre-defined course - entailing several topics - rather than choosing courses à la carte as in the United States.

Even in these cases, however, several "mathematics" options may be offered, selected based on the student's intended studies post high school.

(In South Africa, for example, the options are Mathematics, Mathematical Literacy and Technical Mathematics.

) Thus, a science-oriented curriculum typically overlaps the first year of university mathematics, and includes differential calculus and trigonometry at age 16–17 and integral calculus , complex numbers , analytic geometry , exponential and logarithmic functions , and infinite series in their final year of secondary school; Probability and statistics are similarly often taught.

At college and university level, science and engineering students will be required to take multivariable calculus , differential equations , and linear algebra ; at several US colleges, the minor or AS in mathematics substantively comprises these courses.

Mathematics majors study additional other areas within pure mathematics —and often in applied mathematics—with the requirement of specified advanced courses in analysis and modern algebra.

Other topics in pure mathematics include differential geometry , set theory , and topology.

Applied mathematics may be taken as a major subject in its own right, such as partial differential equations , optimization , and numerical analysis.

Specific topics are taught within other courses: for example, civil engineers may be required to study fluid mechanics , [29] and "math for computer science" might include graph theory , permutation , probability, and formal mathematical proofs.

[30] Pure and applied math degrees often include modules in probability theory or mathematical statistics , as well as stochastic processes.

( Theoretical ) physics is mathematics-intensive, often overlapping substantively with the pure or applied math degree.

Business mathematics is usually limited to introductory calculus and (sometimes) matrix calculations; economics programs additionally cover optimization , often differential equations and linear algebra , and sometimes analysis.

Standards [ edit ] Throughout most of history, standards for mathematics education were set locally, by individual schools or teachers, depending on the levels of achievement that were relevant to, realistic for, and considered socially appropriate for their pupils.

In modern times, there has been a move towards regional or national standards, usually under the umbrella of a wider standard school curriculum.

In England , for example, standards for mathematics education are set as part of the National Curriculum for England, [31] while Scotland maintains its own educational system.

Many other countries have centralized ministries which set national standards or curricula, and sometimes even textbooks.

Ma (2000) summarized the research of others who found, based on nationwide data, that students with higher scores on standardized mathematics tests had taken more mathematics courses in high school.

This led some states to require three years of mathematics instead of two.

But because this requirement was often met by taking another lower-level mathematics course, the additional courses had a “diluted” effect in raising achievement levels.

[32] In North America, the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) published the Principles and Standards for School Mathematics in 2000 for the United States and Canada, which boosted the trend towards reform mathematics.

In 2006, the NCTM released Curriculum Focal Points , which recommend the most important mathematical topics for each grade level through grade 8.

However, these standards were guidelines to implement as American states and Canadian provinces chose.

In 2010, the National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and the Council of Chief State School Officers published the Common Core State Standards for US states, which were subsequently adopted by most states.

Adoption of the Common Core State Standards in mathematics is at the discretion of each state, and is not mandated by the federal government.

[33] "States routinely review their academic standards and may choose to change or add onto the standards to best meet the needs of their students.

" [34] The NCTM has state affiliates that have different education standards at the state level.

For example, Missouri has the Missouri Council of Teachers of Mathematics (MCTM) which has its pillars and standards of education listed on its website.

The MCTM also offers membership opportunities to teachers and future teachers so that they can stay up to date on the changes in math educational standards.

[35] The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), created by the Organisation for the Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), is a global program studying the reading, science, and mathematics abilities of 15-year-old students.

[36] The first assessment was conducted in the year 2000 with 43 countries participating.

[37] PISA has repeated this assessment every three years to provide comparable data, helping to guide global education to better prepare youth for future economies.

There have been many ramifications following the results of triennial PISA assessments due to implicit and explicit responses of stakeholders, which have led to education reform and policy change.

[37] [38] [23] Research [ edit ] According to Hiebert and Grouws, "Robust, useful theories of classroom teaching do not yet exist.

" [39] However, there are useful theories on how children learn mathematics, and much research has been conducted in recent decades to explore how these theories can be applied to teaching.

The following results are examples of some of the current findings in the field of mathematics education.

Important results [39] [ edit ] One of the strongest results in recent research is that the most important feature of effective teaching is giving students "the opportunity to learn".

Teachers can set expectations, times, kinds of tasks, questions, acceptable answers, and types of discussions that will influence students' opportunities to learn.

This must involve both skill efficiency and conceptual understanding.

Conceptual understanding [39] [ edit ] Two of the most important features of teaching in the promotion of conceptual understanding times are attending explicitly to concepts and allowing students to struggle with important mathematics.

Both of these features have been confirmed through a wide variety of studies.

Explicit attention to concepts involves making connections between facts, procedures, and ideas.

(This is often seen as one of the strong points in mathematics teaching in East Asian countries, where teachers typically devote about half of their time to making connections.

At the other extreme is the US, where essentially no connections are made in school classrooms.

[40] ) These connections can be made through explanation of the meaning of a procedure, questions comparing strategies and solutions of problems, noticing how one problem is a special case of another, reminding students of the main point, discussing how lessons connect, and so on.

Deliberate, productive struggle with mathematical ideas refers to the fact that when students exert effort with important mathematical ideas, even if this struggle initially involves confusion and errors, the result is greater learning.

This is true whether the struggle is due to intentionally challenging, well-implemented teaching, or unintentionally confusing, faulty teaching.

Formative assessment [41] [ edit ] Formative assessment is both the best and cheapest way to boost student achievement, student engagement, and teacher professional satisfaction.

Results surpass those of reducing class size or increasing teachers' content knowledge.

Effective assessment is based on clarifying what students should know, creating appropriate activities to obtain the evidence needed, giving good feedback, encouraging students to take control of their learning and letting students be resources for one another.

Homework [42] [ edit ] Homework assignments which lead students to practice past lessons or prepare for future lessons is more effective than those going over the current lesson.

Students benefit from feedback.

Students with learning disabilities or low motivation may profit from rewards.

For younger children, homework helps simple skills, but not broader measures of achievement.

Students with difficulties [42] [ edit ] Students with genuine difficulties (unrelated to motivation or past instruction) struggle with basic facts , answer impulsively, struggle with mental representations, have poor number sense , and have poor short-term memory.

Techniques that have been found productive for helping such students include peer-assisted learning, explicit teaching with visual aids, instruction informed by formative assessment , and encouraging students to think aloud.

Algebraic reasoning [42] [ edit ] Elementary school children need to spend a long time learning to express algebraic properties without symbols before learning algebraic notation.

When learning symbols, many students believe letters always represent unknowns and struggle with the concept of variable.

They prefer arithmetic reasoning to algebraic equations for solving word problems.

It takes time to move from arithmetic to algebraic generalizations to describe patterns.

Students often have trouble with the minus sign and understand the equals sign to mean "the answer is.

".

Methodology [ edit ] As with other educational research (and the social sciences in general), mathematics education research depends on both quantitative and qualitative studies.

Quantitative research includes studies that use inferential statistics to answer specific questions, such as whether a certain teaching method gives significantly better results than the status quo.

The best quantitative studies involve randomized trials where students or classes are randomly assigned different methods to test their effects.

They depend on large samples to obtain statistically significant results.

Qualitative research , such as case studies , action research , discourse analysis , and clinical interviews , depend on small but focused samples in an attempt to understand student learning and to look at how and why a given method gives the results it does.

Such studies cannot conclusively establish that one method is better than another, as randomized trials can, but unless it is understood why treatment X is better than treatment Y, application of results of quantitative studies will often lead to "lethal mutations" [39] of the finding in actual classrooms.

Exploratory qualitative research is also useful for suggesting new hypotheses , which can eventually be tested by randomized experiments.

Both qualitative and quantitative studies, therefore, are considered essential in education—just as in the other social sciences.

[43] Many studies are “mixed”, simultaneously combining aspects of both quantitative and qualitative research, as appropriate.

Randomized trials [ edit ] There has been some controversy over the relative strengths of different types of research.

Because of an opinion that randomized trials provide clear, objective evidence on “what works”, policymakers often consider only those studies.

Some scholars have pushed for more random experiments in which teaching methods are randomly assigned to classes.

[44] [45] In other disciplines concerned with human subjects—like biomedicine , psychology , and policy evaluation—controlled, randomized experiments remain the preferred method of evaluating treatments.

[46] [47] Educational statisticians and some mathematics educators have been working to increase the use of randomized experiments to evaluate teaching methods.

[45] On the other hand, many scholars in educational schools have argued against increasing the number of randomized experiments, often because of philosophical objections, such as the ethical difficulty of randomly assigning students to various treatments when the effects of such treatments are not yet known to be effective, [48] or the difficulty of assuring rigid control of the independent variable in fluid, real school settings.

[49] In the United States, the National Mathematics Advisory Panel (NMAP) published a report in 2008 based on studies, some of which used randomized assignment of treatments to experimental units , such as classrooms or students.

The NMAP report's preference for randomized experiments received criticism from some scholars.

[50] In 2010, the What Works Clearinghouse (essentially the research arm for the Department of Education ) responded to ongoing controversy by extending its research base to include non-experimental studies, including regression discontinuity designs and single-case studies.

[51] Organizations [ edit ] Advisory Committee on Mathematics Education American Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges Association of Teachers of Mathematics Canadian Mathematical Society C.

D.

Howe Institute Mathematical Association National Council of Teachers of Mathematics OECD International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement See also [ edit ] Aspects of mathematics education [ edit ] Cognitively Guided Instruction Critical mathematics pedagogy Ethnomathematics Number sentence , primary level mathematics education Pre-math skills Sir Cumference , children's mathematics educational book series Statistics education North American issues [ edit ] Mathematics education in the United States Mathematical difficulties [ edit ] Dyscalculia Mathematical anxiety References [ edit ] ^ Dudley, Underwood (April 2002).

"The World's First Mathematics Textbook".

Math Horizons.

9 (4).

Taylor & Francis, Ltd.

: 8–11.

doi : 10.

1080/10724117.

2002.

11975154.

JSTOR 25678363.

S2CID 126067145.

^ Neugebauer, Otto (1969).

The exact sciences in antiquity.

New York: Dover Publications.

p.

36.

ISBN 978-0-486-22332-2.

In other words it was known during the whole duration of Babylonian mathematics that the sum of the squares on the lengths of the sides of a right triangle equals the square of the length of the hypotenuse.

^ Friberg, Jöran (1981).

"Methods and traditions of Babylonian mathematics: Plimpton 322, Pythagorean triples, and the Babylonian triangle parameter equations".

Historia Mathematica.

8 : 277–318.

doi : 10.

1016/0315-0860(81)90069-0.

: p.

306 "Although Plimpton 322 is a unique text of its kind, there are several other known texts testifying that the Pythagorean theorem was well known to the mathematicians of the Old Babylonian period.

" ^ Høyrup, Jens.

"Pythagorean 'Rule' and 'Theorem' – Mirror of the Relation Between Babylonian and Greek Mathematics".

In Renger, Johannes (ed.

).

Babylon: Focus mesopotamischer Geschichte, Wiege früher Gelehrsamkeit, Mythos in der Moderne.

2.

Internationales Colloquium der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft 24.

–26.

März 1998 in Berlin (PDF).

Berlin: Deutsche Orient-Gesellschaft / Saarbrücken: SDV Saarbrücker Druckerei und Verlag.

pp.

393–407.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-02-25.

Retrieved 2022-11-15.

, p.

406, " To judge from this evidence alone it is therefore likely that the Pythagorean rule was discovered within the lay surveyors' environment, possibly as a spin-off from the problem treated in Db 2 -146, somewhere between 2300 and 1825 BC.

" ( Db 2 -146 is an Old Babylonian clay tablet from Eshnunna concerning the computation of the sides of a rectangle given its area and diagonal.

) ^ Robson, E.

(2008).

Mathematics in Ancient Iraq: A Social History.

Princeton University Press.

: p.

109 "Many Old Babylonian mathematical practitioners … knew that the square on the diagonal of a right triangle had the same area as the sum of the squares on the length and width: that relationship is used in the worked solutions to word problems on cut-and-paste 'algebra' on seven different tablets, from Ešnuna, Sippar, Susa, and an unknown location in southern Babylonia.

" ^ Ferguson, Kitty (2010).

Pythagoras : His Lives and the Legacy of a Rational Universe.

London: Icon.

pp.

78–84.

ISBN 978-184831-231-9.

^ a b Gabrielle Emanuel (23 Jul 2016).

"Why We Learn Math Lessons That Date Back 500 Years".

National Public Radio.

Archived from the original on 10 April 2018.

Retrieved 10 April 2018.

^ a b "Why We Learn Math Lessons That Date Back 500 Years".

NPR.

org.

Archived from the original on 2018-04-10.

Retrieved 2018-04-10.

^ William L.

Schaaf (1941) A Bibliography of Mathematical Education Archived 2020-01-10 at the Wayback Machine , Forest Hills, N.

Y.

: Stevinus Press, link from HathiTrust ^ Marshall McLuhan (1964) Understanding Media , p.

13 "McLuhan: Understanding Media".

Archived from the original on 2008-12-08.

Retrieved 2007-09-04.

^ Hart, Eric W.

; Martin, W.

Gary (2018).

"Discrete mathematics is essential mathematics in a 21st century school curriculum.

".

Teaching and learning discrete mathematics worldwide: Curriculum and research.

pp.

3–19.

doi : 10.

1007/978-3-319-70308-4_1.

^ Greefrath, Gilbert; Siller, Hans‑Stefan; Vorhölter, Katrin; Kaiser, Gabriele (2022).

"Mathematical modelling and discrete mathematics: opportunities for modern mathematics teaching".

ZDM–Mathematics Education.

54 (4): 865–879.

doi : 10.

1007/s11858-022-01339-5.

hdl : 11250/3054903.

^ Education, McGraw-Hill (2017-10-20).

"5 Approaches to Teaching PreK-12 Numeracy".

Inspired Ideas.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-26.

Retrieved 2019-02-12.

^ "Euclidean Geometry".

www.

pitt.

edu.

Archived from the original on 2019-01-30.

Retrieved 2019-02-12.

^ "Axiomatic Systems".

web.

mnstate.

edu.

Archived from the original on 2019-07-17.

Retrieved 2019-02-12.

^ "Heuristics".

theory.

stanford.

edu.

Archived from the original on 2019-04-06.

Retrieved 2019-02-12.

^ "Passing Mathematics Just Got Easier For Students With This New Platform: Mathematica - Techzim".

Techzim.

2018-06-16.

Archived from the original on 2018-06-19.

Retrieved 2018-06-19.

^ "5 Apps to Help All Students with Math".

Technology Solutions That Drive Education.

2017-10-13.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-26.

Retrieved 2018-06-19.

^ Mosbergen, Dominique (2014-10-22).

"This Free App Will Solve Math Problems For You".

Huffington Post.

Archived from the original on 2017-09-22.

Retrieved 2018-06-21.

^ "Classical Education and STEM: a Common Misconception".

Clapham School.

2018-01-25.

Archived from the original on 2019-02-12.

Retrieved 2019-02-12.

^ "Mathematical Current Events".

Archived from the original on 2011-11-20.

Retrieved 2011-11-29.

^ Sriraman, Bharath (2012).

Crossroads in the History of Mathematics and Mathematics Education.

Monograph Series in Mathematics Education.

Vol.

12.

IAP.

ISBN 978-1-61735-704-6.

^ a b Ansari, Daniel (March 2016).

"No More Math Wars".

The Education Digest.

81 (7): 4–9.

ProQuest 1761255371.

^ Stokke, Anna (2015).

What to Do About Canada's Declining Math Scores.

Toronto, Ontario: C.

D.

Howe Institute.

pp.

4–5.

ISBN 9780888069498.

^ Singmaster, David (7 September 1993).

"The Unreasonable Utility of Recreational Mathematics".

For First European Congress of Mathematics, Paris, July, 1992.

Archived from the original on 7 February 2002.

Retrieved 17 September 2012.

^ "Foundations for Success: The Final Report of the National Mathematics Advisory Panel" (PDF).

U.

S.

Department of Education.

2008.

p.

20.

Archived from the original (PDF) on March 17, 2015.

^ Nunes, Terezinha; Dorneles, Beatriz Vargas; Lin, Pi-Jen; Rathgeb-Schnierer, Elisabeth (2016), "Teaching and Learning About Whole Numbers in Primary School", ICME-13 Topical Surveys , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

1–50, doi : 10.

1007/978-3-319-45113-8_1 , hdl : 10183/164060 , ISBN 978-3-319-45112-1 ^ Mullis, Ina V.

S.

; et al.

(June 1997).

"Mathematics Achievement in the Primary School Years.

IEA's Third International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS)".

Third International Mathematics and Science Study.

International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement ; Boston College Center for the Study of Testing, Evaluation, and Educational Policy.

ISBN 1-889938-04-1.

^ "MIT - S.

B.

In 1-C Civil Engineering Curriculum | Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering, MIT".

Archived from the original on 2014-07-14.

Retrieved 2014-06-18.

^ "Mathematics for Computer Science".

MIT OpenCourseWare.

Archived from the original on 2019-05-10.

Retrieved 2019-01-02.

^ "Mathematics curriculum".

UK Department of Education.

17 January 2013.

Archived from the original on 2 May 2012.

Retrieved 1 May 2012.

^ Ma, X.

(2000).

"A longitudinal assessment of antecedent course work in mathematics and subsequent mathematical attainment".

Journal of Educational Research.

94 (1): 16–29.

doi : 10.

1080/00220670009598739.

S2CID 144948416.

^ "Myths vs.

Facts - Common Core State Standards Initiative".

www.

corestandards.

org.

Archived from the original on 2017-08-02.

Retrieved 2017-07-28.

^ "Standards in Your State - Common Core State Standards Initiative".

www.

corestandards.

org.

Archived from the original on 2019-06-10.

Retrieved 2017-07-28.

^ "MoCTM - Home".

www.

moctm.

org.

Archived from the original on 2018-02-12.

Retrieved 2018-02-11.

^ "What is PISA?".

OECD.

2018.

Archived from the original on 2018-03-04.

Retrieved 2019-10-14.

^ a b Lockheed, Marlaine (2015).

The Experience of Middle-Income Countries Participating in PISA 2000.

PISA.

France: OECD Publishing.

p.

30.

ISBN 978-92-64-24618-8.

^ Sellar, S.

, & Lingard, B.

, Sam; Lingard, Bob (April 2018).

"International large-scale assessments, affective worlds and policy impacts in education" (PDF).

International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education.

31 (5): 367–381.

doi : 10.

1080/09518398.

2018.

1449982.

S2CID 149999527.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-03-07.

Retrieved 2019-11-30.

{{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c d Hiebert, James; Grouws, Douglas (2007), "9", The Effects of Classroom Mathematics Teaching on Students' Learning , vol.

1, Reston VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, pp.

371–404 ^ Institute of Education Sciences, ed.

(2003), "Highlights From the TIMSS 1999 Video Study of Eighth-Grade Mathematics Teaching", Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) - Overview , U.

S.

Department of Education, archived from the original on 2012-05-08 , retrieved 2012-05-08 ^ Black, P.

; Wiliam, Dylan (1998).

"Assessment and Classroom Learning" (PDF).

Assessment in Education.

5 (1): 7–74.

doi : 10.

1080/0969595980050102.

S2CID 143347721.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-07-26.

Retrieved 2018-07-25.

^ a b c "Research clips and briefs".

Archived from the original on 2014-10-02.

Retrieved 2009-11-15.

^ Raudenbush, Stephen (2005).

"Learning from Attempts to Improve Schooling: The Contribution of Methodological Diversity".

Educational Researcher.

34 (5): 25–31.

CiteSeerX 10.

1.

1.

649.

7042.

doi : 10.

3102/0013189X034005025.

S2CID 145667765.

^ Cook, Thomas D.

(2002).

"Randomized Experiments in Educational Policy Research: A Critical Examination of the Reasons the Educational Evaluation Community has Offered for Not Doing Them".

Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis.

24 (3): 175–199.

doi : 10.

3102/01623737024003175.

S2CID 144583638.

^ a b Working Group on Statistics in Mathematics Education Research (2007).

"Using Statistics Effectively in Mathematics Education Research: A report from a series of workshops organized by the American Statistical Association with funding from the National Science Foundation" (PDF).

The American Statistical Association.

Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-02-02.

Retrieved 2013-03-25.

^ Shadish, William R.

; Cook, Thomas D.

; Campbell, Donald T.

(2002).

Experimental and quasi-experimental designs for generalized causal inference (2nd ed.

).

Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

ISBN 978-0-395-61556-0.

^ See articles on NCLB , National Mathematics Advisory Panel , Scientifically based research and What Works Clearinghouse ^ Mosteller, Frederick; Boruch, Robert (2002), Evidence Matters: Randomized Trials in Education Research , Brookings Institution Press ^ Chatterji, Madhabi (December 2004).

"Evidence on "What Works": An Argument for Extended-Term Mixed-Method (ETMM) Evaluation Designs".

Educational Researcher.

33 (9): 3–13.

doi : 10.

3102/0013189x033009003.

S2CID 14742527.

^ Kelly, Anthony (2008).

"Reflections on the National Mathematics Advisory Panel Final Report".

Educational Researcher.

37 (9): 561–4.

doi : 10.

3102/0013189X08329353.

S2CID 143471869.

This is the introductory article to an issue devoted to this debate on report of the National Mathematics Advisory Panel, particularly on its use of randomized experiments.

^ Sparks, Sarah (October 20, 2010).

"Federal Criteria For Studies Grow".

Education Week.

p.

1.

Voit, Rita.

"Accelerated Math: What Every Parent Should Know".

Resources by HEROES Academy.

Retrieved 20 September 2023.

Further reading [ edit ] Anderson, John R.

; Reder, Lynne M.

; Simon, Herbert A.

; Ericsson, K.

Anders; Glaser, Robert (1998).

"Radical Constructivism and Cognitive Psychology" (PDF).

Brookings Papers on Education Policy (1): 227–278.

Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-06-26.

Retrieved 2011-09-25.

Auslander, Maurice; et al.

(2004).

"Goals for School Mathematics: The Report of the Cambridge Conference on School Mathematics 1963" (PDF).

Cambridge MA: Center for the Study of Mathematics Curriculum.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2010-07-15.

Retrieved 2009-08-06.

Ball, Lynda, et al.

Uses of Technology in Primary and Secondary Mathematics Education (Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2018).

Dreher, Anika, et al.

"What kind of content knowledge do secondary mathematics teachers need?.

" Journal für Mathematik-Didaktik 39.

2 (2018): 319-341 online Archived 2021-04-18 at the Wayback Machine.

Drijvers, Paul, et al.

Uses of technology in lower secondary mathematics education: A concise topical survey (Springer Nature, 2016).

Gosztonyi, Katalin.

"Mathematical culture and mathematics education in Hungary in the XXth century.

" in Mathematical cultures (Birkhäuser, Cham, 2016) pp.

71–89.

online Paul Lockhart (2009).

A Mathematician's Lament: How School Cheats Us Out of Our Most Fascinating and Imaginative Art Form.

Bellevue Literary Press.

ISBN 978-1934137178.

Losano, Leticia, and Márcia Cristina de Costa Trindade Cyrino.

"Current research on prospective secondary mathematics teachers' professional identity.

" in The mathematics education of prospective secondary teachers around the world (Springer, Cham, 2017) pp.

25-32.

Sriraman, Bharath ; English, Lyn (2010).

Theories of Mathematics Education.

Springer.

ISBN 978-3-642-00774-3.

Strogatz, Steven Henry ; Joffray, Don (2009).

The Calculus of Friendship: What a Teacher and a Student Learned about Life While Corresponding about Math.

Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-13493-2.

Strutchens, Marilyn E.

, et al.

The mathematics education of prospective secondary teachers around the world (Springer Nature, 2017) online Archived 2021-04-18 at the Wayback Machine.

Wong, Khoon Yoong.

"Enriching secondary mathematics education with 21st century competencies.

" in Developing 21st Century Competencies In The Mathematics Classroom: Yearbook 2016 (Association Of Mathematics Educators.

2016) pp.

33–50.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Mathematics education.

Math Education at Curlie History of Mathematical Education A quarter century of US 'math wars' and political partisanship.

David Klein.

California State University, Northridge, United States v t e Mathematics education Geography United States New York United Kingdom Australia Approach Traditional Exercise Three-part lesson Singapore Saxon Reform Computer-based Modern elementary New Informal Cognitively guided Ethno Critical Category Commons v t e Major mathematics areas History Timeline Future Lists Glossary Foundations Category theory Information theory Mathematical logic Philosophy of mathematics Set theory Type theory Algebra Abstract Commutative Elementary Group theory Linear Multilinear Universal Homological Analysis Calculus Real analysis Complex analysis Hypercomplex analysis Differential equations Functional analysis Harmonic analysis Measure theory Discrete Combinatorics Graph theory Order theory Geometry Algebraic Analytic Arithmetic Differential Discrete Euclidean Finite Number theory Arithmetic Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Diophantine geometry Topology General Algebraic Differential Geometric Homotopy theory Applied Engineering mathematics Mathematical biology Mathematical chemistry Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Mathematical physics Mathematical psychology Mathematical sociology Mathematical statistics Probability Statistics Systems science Control theory Game theory Operations research Computational Computer science Theory of computation Computational complexity theory Numerical analysis Optimization Computer algebra Related topics Mathematicians lists Informal mathematics Films about mathematicians Recreational mathematics Mathematics and art Mathematics education Mathematics portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Education Overview General Glossary Index Outline By perspective Aims and objectives Anthropology Assessment Evaluation Course evaluation Psychometrics Standards-based Standardized test Teacher quality Economics Education sciences Evidence-based History Inclusion Leadership Pedagogy Philosophy Policy Politics Psychology Research Rights Sociology Technology Instructional Instructional design By subject Agricultural Art Bilingual Business Chemistry Computer science Death Design Economics Engineering Environmental Euthenics Health Language Legal Mathematics Medical Military Music Nursing Peace Performing arts Philosophy Physical Physics Reading Religious Science Sex Teacher Technology Values Vocational Alternative Adult education Autodidacticism Democratic Education reform Gifted education Homeschooling Religious education Special education Concepts 21st century skills Bloom's taxonomy Cognitive load Class arrangement Critical thinking Curriculum Hidden Studies Theory Learning theory Lesson plan Pedagogical pattern Teacher look Teaching method Active learning Blended learning Contemplative Demonstration Dialogic learning Experiential Feedback Passive Peer instruction Personalized Phenomenon-based Problem-based Project-based Student-centered Socratic Teaching philosophy Wikimedia Books Definitions Images Learning resources News Quotes Texts Stages Early childhood education Primary education Secondary education Tertiary education Preschool → Kindergarten → Primary school → Infant → Junior → Secondary school → Middle school → High school → Higher education Vocational Further ( Continuing ) Undergraduate → Postgraduate Portal Education by region Education in Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Education in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus East Timor (Timor-Leste) Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Education in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Other entities European Union Education in North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands Education in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Clipperton Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Education in South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Schools portal Category WikiProject Authority control databases Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Retrieved from " https://en.

wikipedia.

org/w/index.

php?title=Mathematics_education&oldid=1225854243 " Categories : Mathematics education Mathematical science occupations Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 Articles with Curlie links Articles with EMU identifiers This page was last edited on 27 May 2024, at 03:37 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.

0 ; additional terms may apply.

By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view.