Hypotheses non fingo - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Original remark 2 Later commentary 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Hypotheses non fingo 13 languages Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Latina Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Phrase appearing in a 1713 essay by Isaac Newton Hypotheses non fingo ( Latin for "I frame no hypotheses ", or "I contrive no hypotheses") is a phrase used by Isaac Newton in an essay, " General Scholium ", which was appended to the second (1713) edition of the Principia.

Original remark [ edit ] A 1999 translation of the Principia presents Newton's remark as follows: I have not as yet been able to discover the reason for these properties of gravity from phenomena, and I do not feign hypotheses.

For whatever is not deduced from the phenomena must be called a hypothesis; and hypotheses, whether metaphysical or physical, or based on occult qualities, or mechanical, have no place in experimental philosophy.

In this philosophy particular propositions are inferred from the phenomena, and afterwards rendered general by induction.

[1] Later commentary [ edit ] The 19th-century philosopher of science William Whewell qualified this statement, saying that, "it was by such a use of hypotheses, that both Newton himself and Kepler , on whose discoveries those of Newton were based, made their discoveries".

Whewell stated: What is requisite is, that the hypothesis should be close to the facts, and not connected with them by other arbitrary and untried facts; and that the philosopher should be ready to resign it as soon as the facts refuse to confirm it.

[2] Later, Imre Lakatos asserted that such a resignation should not be too rushed.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Action at a distance Primum movens References [ edit ] ^ Isaac Newton (1726).

Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica , General Scholium.

Third edition, page 943 of I.

Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman's 1999 translation, University of California Press ISBN 0-520-08817-4 , 974 pages.

^ Whewell, William (1840).

The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences.

London.

p.

438.

v t e Sir Isaac Newton Publications Fluxions (1671) De Motu (1684) Principia (1687) Opticks (1704) Queries (1704) Arithmetica (1707) De Analysi (1711) Other writings Quaestiones (1661–1665) " standing on the shoulders of giants " (1675) Notes on the Jewish Temple (c.

1680) " General Scholium " (1713; " hypotheses non fingo " ) Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728) Corruptions of Scripture (1754) Contributions Calculus fluxion Impact depth Inertia Newton disc Newton polygon Newton–Okounkov body Newton's reflector Newtonian telescope Newton scale Newton's metal Spectrum Structural coloration Newtonianism Bucket argument Newton's inequalities Newton's law of cooling Newton's law of universal gravitation post-Newtonian expansion parameterized gravitational constant Newton–Cartan theory Schrödinger–Newton equation Newton's laws of motion Kepler's laws Newtonian dynamics Newton's method in optimization Apollonius's problem truncated Newton method Gauss–Newton algorithm Newton's rings Newton's theorem about ovals Newton–Pepys problem Newtonian potential Newtonian fluid Classical mechanics Corpuscular theory of light Leibniz–Newton calculus controversy Newton's notation Rotating spheres Newton's cannonball Newton–Cotes formulas Newton's method generalized Gauss–Newton method Newton fractal Newton's identities Newton polynomial Newton's theorem of revolving orbits Newton–Euler equations Newton number kissing number problem Newton's quotient Parallelogram of force Newton–Puiseux theorem Absolute space and time Luminiferous aether Newtonian series table Personal life Woolsthorpe Manor (birthplace) Cranbury Park (home) Early life Later life Apple tree Religious views Occult studies Scientific Revolution Copernican Revolution Relations Catherine Barton (niece) John Conduitt (nephew-in-law) Isaac Barrow (professor) William Clarke (mentor) Benjamin Pulleyn (tutor) John Keill (disciple) William Stukeley (friend) William Jones (friend) Abraham de Moivre (friend) Depictions Newton by Blake (monotype) Newton by Paolozzi (sculpture) Isaac Newton Gargoyle Astronomers Monument Namesake Newton (unit) Newton's cradle Isaac Newton Institute Isaac Newton Medal Isaac Newton Telescope Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes XMM-Newton Sir Isaac Newton Sixth Form Statal Institute of Higher Education Isaac Newton Newton International Fellowship Categories Isaac Newton This philosophy of science -related article is a stub.

You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.

wikipedia.

org/w/index.

php?title=Hypotheses_non_fingo&oldid=1170612558 " Categories : Latin philosophical phrases Gravity Isaac Newton History of physics Razors (philosophy) Epistemology of science Philosophy of science stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2020 All stub articles This page was last edited on 16 August 2023, at 03:47 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.

0 ; additional terms may apply.

By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view.