Glossary of medicine - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Glossary of medicine 5 languages Asturianu Français Nederlands Română தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia List of definitions of terms and concepts commonly used in the study of medicine Medicine Statue of Asclepius , the Greek god of medicine, holding the symbolic Rod of Asclepius with its coiled serpent Specialist Medical specialty Glossary Glossary of medicine This glossary of medical terms is a list of definitions about medicine , its sub-disciplines, and related fields.

Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References A [ edit ] Aarskog–Scott syndrome – (AAS) A rare, inherited (X-linked) disease characterized by short stature, facial abnormalities, skeletal and genital anomalies.

[1] Abdomen – The part of the body between the chest and pelvis , which contains most of the tubelike organs of the digestive tract, as well as several solid organs.

Abdominal external oblique muscle – The largest, and outermost, of the three flat muscles of the lateral anterior abdominal wall.

Abdominal internal oblique muscle – A muscle of the abdominal wall, which lies below the external oblique and just above the transverse abdominal muscles.

Abductor pollicis brevis muscle – A muscle in the hand that abducts (straightens) the thumb.

Abductor pollicis longus muscle – One of the extrinsic muscles of the hand.

Its major function is to abduct the thumb at the wrist.

Abscess – A collection of pus that has built up within the tissue of the body.

[2] Accommodation – the process by which the eye focuses on an object.

Accommodation reflex – a reflex action of the eye, measured as a response to focusing on a near object, then looking at a distant object (and vice versa).

Acetabulum – a concave surface of the pelvis , which forms the pelvic section of the hip joint.

[3] [4] Achilles tendon – a tendon of the back of the leg, and the thickest in the human body.

It attaches the plantaris , gastrocnemius (calf) and soleus muscles to the calcaneus (heel) bone.

Acne – a long-term skin disease that occurs when hair follicles are clogged with dead skin cells and oil from the skin.

[5] Acne vulgaris – see Acne Acupressure – an alternative medicine technique where pressure is applied to acupuncture points.

Pressure may be applied by hand, by elbow, or with various devices.

Acupuncture – a form of alternative medicine [6] in which thin needles are inserted into the body.

[7] Adam's apple – the lump or protrusion that is formed by the angle of the thyroid cartilage surrounding the larynx seen especially in males.

Adaptive immune system – also known as the acquired immune system or, more rarely, as the specific immune system, is a subsystem of the overall immune system that is composed of highly specialized, systemic cells and processes that eliminate pathogens or prevent their growth.

Adenoma – (plural adenomas or adenomata) is a benign tumor of epithelial tissue with glandular origin, glandular characteristics, or both.

Adrenal gland – The adrenal glands (also known as suprarenal glands) are endocrine glands that produce a variety of hormones including adrenaline and the steroids aldosterone and cortisol.

[8] [9] They are found above the kidneys.

Allergy – Allergies, also known as allergic diseases, are a number of conditions caused by hypersensitivity of the immune system to typically harmless substances in the environment.

[10] These diseases include hay fever , food allergies , atopic dermatitis , allergic asthma , and anaphylaxis.

[11] Symptoms may include red eyes , an itchy rash, sneezing , a runny nose , shortness of breath , or swelling.

[12] Food intolerances and food poisoning are separate conditions.

[13] [14] ADHD – Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.

Alzheimer's disease – (AD), also referred to simply as Alzheimer's, is a chronic neurodegenerative disease that usually starts slowly and worsens over time.

[15] [16] It is the cause of 60–70% of cases of dementia.

[15] [16] The most common early symptom is difficulty in remembering recent events ( short-term memory loss).

[15] Anal canal – is the terminal part of the large intestine.

[17] It is situated between the rectum and anus , [18] below the level of the pelvic diaphragm.

In humans it is approximately 2.

5 to 4 cm (0.

98-1.

58 in) long.

It lies in the anal triangle of perineum in between the right and left ischioanal fossa.

Anatomy – is the branch of biology concerned with the study of the structure of organisms and their parts.

[19] Anatomy is a branch of natural science which deals with the structural organization of living things.

Anesthesiology – Anesthesiology, anaesthesiology, anaesthesia or anaesthetics (see Terminology ) is the medical speciality concerned with the total perioperative care of patients before, during and after surgery.

[20] Angiology – is the medical specialty which studies the diseases of the circulatory system and of the lymphatic system , i.

e.

, arteries , veins and lymphatic vessels , and its diseases.

Ankle – The ankle, or the talocrural region, [21] is the region where the foot and the leg meet.

[22] The ankle includes three joints : the ankle joint proper or talocrural joint, the subtalar joint , and the inferior tibiofibular joint.

[23] [24] [25] The movements produced at this joint are dorsiflexion and plantarflexion of the foot.

In common usage, the term ankle refers exclusively to the ankle region.

In medical terminology, "ankle" (without qualifiers) can refer broadly to the region or specifically to the talocrural joint.

[21] [26] Anterior tibial artery – The anterior tibial artery of the leg carries blood to the anterior compartment of the leg and dorsal surface of the foot , from the popliteal artery.

Antibiotic – is a type of antimicrobial substance active against bacteria and is the most important type of antibacterial agent for fighting bacterial infections.

Antibiotic medications are widely used in the treatment and prevention of such infections.

[27] [28] Antibody – (Ab), also known as an immunoglobulin (Ig), [29] is a large, Y-shaped protein produced mainly by plasma cells that is used by the immune system to neutralize pathogens such as pathogenic bacteria and viruses.

Aorta – is the main artery in the human body , originating from the left ventricle of the heart and extending down to the abdomen , where it splits into two smaller arteries (the common iliac arteries ).

The aorta distributes oxygenated blood to all parts of the body through the systemic circulation.

[30] Appendix – The appendix (or vermiform appendix; also cecal [or caecal] appendix; vermix; or vermiform process) is a finger-like, blind-ended tube connected to the cecum , from which it develops in the embryo.

The cecum is a pouch-like structure of the colon , located at the junction of the small and the large intestines.

The term " vermiform " comes from Latin and means "worm-shaped.

" The appendix used to be considered a vestigial organ , but this view has changed over the past decades.

[31] Arm – is the part of the upper limb between the glenohumeral joint (shoulder joint) and the elbow joint.

In common usage, the arm extends to the hand.

It can be divided into the upper arm, which extends from the shoulder to the elbow, the forearm which extends from the elbow to the hand, and the hand.

Anatomically the shoulder girdle with bones and corresponding muscles is by definition a part of the arm.

The Latin term brachium may refer to either the arm as a whole or to the upper arm on its own.

[32] [33] [34] Arteriole – is a small-diameter blood vessel in the microcirculation that extends and branches out from an artery and leads to capillaries.

[35] Arterioles have muscular walls (usually only one to two layers of smooth muscle ) and are the primary site of vascular resistance.

The greatest change in blood pressure and velocity of blood flow occurs at the transition of arterioles to capillaries.

Artery – is a blood vessel that takes blood away from the heart to all parts of the body (tissues, lungs, etc.

).

Most arteries carry oxygenated blood; the two exceptions are the pulmonary and the umbilical arteries , which carry deoxygenated blood to the organs that oxygenate it.

The effective arterial blood volume is that extracellular fluid which fills the arterial system.

Arthritis – is a term often used to mean any disorder that affects joints.

[36] Symptoms generally include joint pain and stiffness.

[36] Other symptoms may include redness, warmth, swelling , and decreased range of motion of the affected joints.

[36] [37] Asperger syndrome – (AS), also known as Asperger's, is a developmental disorder characterized by significant difficulties in social interaction and nonverbal communication , along with restricted and repetitive patterns of behavior and interests.

[38] As a milder autism spectrum disorder (ASD), it differs from other ASDs by relatively normal language and intelligence.

[39] Although not required for diagnosis, physical clumsiness and unusual use of language are common.

[40] [41] Asthma – is a common long-term inflammatory disease of the airways of the lungs.

[42] It is characterized by variable and recurring symptoms, reversible airflow obstruction , and bronchospasm.

[43] Symptoms include episodes of wheezing , coughing , chest tightness, and shortness of breath.

[44] Atony – absence of muscle tone.

Atrial fibrillation – (AF or A-fib) is an abnormal heart rhythm characterized by rapid and irregular beating of the atria.

[45] Often it starts as brief periods of abnormal beating which become longer and possibly constant over time.

[46] Often episodes have no symptoms.

[47] Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder – is a mental disorder of the neurodevelopmental type.

[48] [49] It is characterized by problems paying attention , excessive activity, or difficulty controlling behavior which is not appropriate for a person's age.

[50] [51] Auscultation – is listening to the internal sounds of the body, usually using a stethoscope.

Auscultation is performed for the purposes of examining the circulatory and respiratory systems ( heart and breath sounds ), as well as the gastrointestinal system.

Autism – is a developmental disorder characterized by troubles with social interaction and communication , and by restricted and repetitive behavior.

[51] Parents usually notice signs during the first two or three years of their child's life.

[52] [51] These signs often develop gradually, though some children with autism reach their developmental milestones at a normal pace before worsening.

[53] Axilla – (also, armpit, underarm or oxter) is the area on the human body directly under the joint where the arm connects to the shoulder.

It also provides the under-arm sweat gland.

Axillary artery – is a large blood vessel that conveys oxygenated blood to the lateral aspect of the thorax , the axilla (armpit) and the upper limb.

Its origin is at the lateral margin of the first rib , before which it is called the subclavian artery.

Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References B [ edit ] Back – The human back is the large posterior area of the human body , rising from the top of the buttocks to the back of the neck and the shoulders.

It is the surface of the body opposite from the chest.

The vertebral column runs the length of the back and creates a central area of recession.

The breadth of the back is created by the shoulders at the top and the pelvis at the bottom.

Back pain – is pain felt in the back.

It is divided into neck pain (cervical), middle back pain (thoracic), lower back pain (lumbar) or coccydynia (tailbone or sacral pain) based on the segment affected.

[54] The lumbar area is the most common area for pain, as it supports most of the weight in the upper body.

[55] Episodes of back pain may be acute , sub-acute, or chronic depending on the duration.

The pain may be characterized as a dull ache, shooting or piercing pain, or a burning sensation.

Discomfort can radiate into the arms and hands as well as the legs or feet , and may include numbness , [54] or weakness in the legs and arms.

Barotrauma – is injury caused by a pressure difference between tissues and a gas filled space.

Basal Anatomy : In the direction of the base.

Antonym apical.

Physiology : Lowest sustained level or minimum level required, as in basal metabolic rate.

Beta cell – Beta cells (β cells) are a type of cell found in pancreatic islets that synthesize and secrete insulin.

Beta cells make up 50-70% of the cells in human islets.

[56] In patients with type I or type II diabetes , beta-cell mass and function are diminished, leading to insufficient insulin secretion and hyperglycemia.

[57] Biceps – also biceps brachii (Latin for "two-headed muscle of the arm"), is a large muscle that lies on the front of the upper arm between the shoulder and the elbow.

Both heads of the muscle arise on the scapula and join to form a single muscle belly which is attached to the upper forearm.

While the biceps crosses both the shoulder and elbow joints, its main function is at the elbow where it flexes the forearm and supinates the forearm.

Both these movements are used when opening a bottle with a corkscrew: first biceps unscrews the cork (supination), then it pulls the cork out (flexion).

[58] Biceps brachii – The biceps, also biceps brachii (Latin for "two-headed muscle of the arm"), is a large muscle that lies on the front of the upper arm between the shoulder and the elbow.

Both heads of the muscle arise on the scapula and join to form a single muscle belly which is attached to the upper forearm.

While the biceps crosses both the shoulder and elbow joints, its main function is at the elbow where it flexes the forearm and supinates the forearm.

Both these movements are used when opening a bottle with a corkscrew: first biceps unscrews the cork (supination), then it pulls the cork out (flexion).

[58] Bile duct – is any of a number of long tube-like structures that carry bile.

Bile, required for the digestion of food, is secreted by the liver into passages that carry bile toward the hepatic duct , which joins with the cystic duct (carrying bile to and from the gallbladder ) to form the common bile duct , which opens into the intestine.

Biliary tract – The biliary tract, (biliary tree or biliary system) refers to the liver , gall bladder and bile ducts , and how they work together to make, store and secrete bile.

Bile consists of water, electrolytes , bile acids , cholesterol , phospholipids and conjugated bilirubin.

Some components are synthesised by hepatocytes (liver cells), the rest are extracted from the blood by the liver.

Binge eating disorder – (BED), is an eating disorder characterized by frequent and recurrent binge eating episodes with associated negative psychological and social problems, but without subsequent purging episodes (e.

g.

vomiting).

BED is a recently described condition, [59] which was required to distinguish binge eating similar to that seen in bulimia nervosa but without characteristic purging.

Individuals who are diagnosed with bulimia nervosa and binge eating disorder exhibit similar patterns of compulsive overeating, neurobiological features of dysfunctional cognitive control and food addiction , and biological and environmental risk factors.

[60] Indeed, some consider BED a milder version of bulimia, and that the conditions are on the same spectrum.

[61] Biological engineering – or bioengineering, or bio-engineering, is the application of principles of biology and the tools of engineering to create usable, tangible, economically viable products.

[62] Biological engineering employs knowledge and expertise from a number of pure and applied sciences, [63] such as mass and heat transfer, kinetics, biocatalysts, biomechanics, bioinformatics , separation and purification processes, bioreactor design, surface science, fluid mechanics, thermodynamics , and polymer science.

It is used in the design of medical devices, diagnostic equipment, biocompatible materials, renewable bioenergy, ecological engineering, agricultural engineering, and other areas that improve the living standards of societies.

Biology – is the natural science that studies life and living organisms , including their physical structure , chemical processes , molecular interactions , physiological mechanisms , development and evolution.

[64] Biochemistry – sometimes called biological chemistry, is the study of chemical processes within and relating to living organisms.

[65] Bioinformatics – is an interdisciplinary field that develops methods and software tools for understanding biological data.

As an interdisciplinary field of science, bioinformatics combines biology , computer science , information engineering , mathematics and statistics to analyze and interpret biological data.

Biopsy – is a medical test commonly performed by a surgeon , interventional radiologist , or an interventional cardiologist involving extraction of sample cells or tissues for examination to determine the presence or extent of a disease.

Biostatistics – are the application of statistics to a wide range of topics in biology.

It encompasses the design of biological experiments , especially in medicine , pharmacy , agriculture and fishery ; the collection, summarization, and analysis of data from those experiments; and the interpretation of, and inference from, the results.

A major branch is medical biostatistics, which is exclusively concerned with medicine and health.

[66] Bipolar disorder – is a mental disorder that causes periods of depression and periods of abnormally elevated mood [67] [68] [69] Birth control – also known as contraception and fertility control, is a method or device used to prevent pregnancy.

[70] Bladder cancer – is any of several types of cancer arising from the tissues of the urinary bladder.

[71] It is a disease in which cells grow abnormally and have the potential to spread to other parts of the body.

[72] [73] Symptoms include blood in the urine , pain with urination , and low back pain.

[71] Blood pressure – is the pressure of circulating blood on the walls of blood vessels.

Used without further specification, "blood pressure" usually refers to the pressure in large arteries of the systemic circulation.

Blood pressure is usually expressed in terms of the systolic pressure (maximum during one heartbeat) over diastolic pressure (minimum in between two heartbeats) and is measured in millimeters of mercury ( mmHg ), above the surrounding atmospheric pressure.

Blood vessel – The blood vessels are the part of the circulatory system , and microcirculation , that transports blood throughout the human body.

[74] Bone – is a rigid organ that constitutes part of the vertebrate skeleton.

Bones support and protect the various organs of the body, produce red and white blood cells , store minerals , provide structure and support for the body, and enable mobility.

Bones come in a variety of shapes and sizes and have a complex internal and external structure.

They are lightweight yet strong and hard, and serve multiple functions.

Bone marrow – is a semi-solid tissue which may be found within the spongy or cancellous portions of bones.

[75] Bone marrow is the primary site of new blood cell production or hematopoiesis.

[76] It is composed of hematopoietic cells , marrow adipose tissue , and supportive stromal cells.

In adult humans, bone marrow is primarily located in the ribs, vertebrae, sternum, and bones of the pelvis.

[77] On average, bone marrow constitutes 4% of the total body mass of humans; in an adult having 65 kilograms of mass (143 lb), bone marrow typically accounts for approximately 2.

6 kilograms (5.

7 lb).

[78] Brachial artery – is the major blood vessel of the (upper) arm.

It is the continuation of the axillary artery beyond the lower margin of teres major muscle.

It continues down the ventral surface of the arm until it reaches the cubital fossa at the elbow.

It then divides into the radial and ulnar arteries which run down the forearm.

In some individuals, the bifurcation occurs much earlier and the ulnar and radial arteries extend through the upper arm.

The pulse of the brachial artery is palpable on the anterior aspect of the elbow, medial to the tendon of the biceps , and, with the use of a stethoscope and sphygmomanometer (blood pressure cuff) often used to measure the blood pressure.

Brachial plexus – is a network of nerves formed by the ventral rami of the lower four cervical nerves and first thoracic nerve ( C5 , C6 , C7 , C8 , and T1 ).

This plexus extends from the spinal cord , through the cervicoaxillary canal in the neck, over the first rib, and into the armpit.

It supplies afferent and efferent nerve fibers to the chest, shoulder, arm and hand.

Brachial veins – In human anatomy , the brachial veins are venae comitantes of the brachial artery in the arm proper.

Because they are deep to muscle, they are considered deep veins.

Their course is that of the brachial artery (in reverse): they begin where radial veins and ulnar veins join (corresponding to the bifurcation of the brachial artery).

They end at the inferior border of the teres major muscle.

At this point, the brachial veins join the basilic vein to form the axillary vein.

The brachial veins also have small tributaries that drain the muscles of the upper arm, such as biceps brachii muscle and triceps brachii muscle.

Brachioradialis – is a muscle of the forearm that flexes the forearm at the elbow.

It is also capable of both pronation and supination , depending on the position of the forearm.

It is attached to the distal styloid process of the radius by way of the brachioradialis tendon, and to the lateral supracondylar ridge of the humerus.

Bradycardia –is a condition typically defined wherein an individual has a resting heart rate of under 60 beats per minute (BPM) in adults.

[79] Brain – The human brain is the central organ of the human nervous system , and with the spinal cord makes up the central nervous system.

The brain consists of the cerebrum , the brainstem and the cerebellum.

It controls most of the activities of the body , processing, integrating, and coordinating the information it receives from the sense organs , and making decisions as to the instructions sent to the rest of the body.

The brain is contained in, and protected by, the skull bones of the head.

Brain tumor – occurs when abnormal cells form within the brain.

[80] There are two main types of tumors : malignant or cancerous tumors and benign tumors.

[80] Brain metastasis – is a cancer that has metastasized (spread) to the brain from another location in the body and is therefore considered a secondary brain tumor.

[81] The metastasis typically shares a cancer cell type with the original site of the cancer.

[82] Breast – The breast is one of two prominences located on the upper ventral region of the torso of primates.

In females, it serves as the mammary gland , which produces and secretes milk to feed infants.

[83] Both females and males develop breasts from the same embryological tissues.

At puberty , estrogens , in conjunction with growth hormone , cause breast development in female humans and to a much lesser extent in other primates.

Breast development in other primate females generally only occurs with pregnancy.

Breast cancer – is cancer that develops from breast tissue.

[84] Signs of breast cancer may include a lump in the breast, a change in breast shape, dimpling of the skin, fluid coming from the nipple, a newly inverted nipple, or a red or scaly patch of skin.

[85] In those with distant spread of the disease , there may be bone pain , swollen lymph nodes , shortness of breath , or yellow skin.

[86] Broca's area – or the Broca area, is a region in the frontal lobe of the dominant hemisphere , usually the left, of the brain [87] with functions linked to speech production.

Bronchiole – The bronchioles or bronchioli are the passageways by which air passes through the nose or mouth to the alveoli (air sacs) of the lungs , in which branches no longer contain cartilage or glands in their submucosa.

They are branches of the bronchi , and are part of the conducting zone of the respiratory system.

The bronchioles divide further into smaller terminal bronchioles which are still in the conducting zone and these then divide into the smaller respiratory bronchioles which mark the beginning of the respiratory region.

Bronchus – A bronchi is a passage of airway in the respiratory system that conducts air into the lungs.

The first bronchi to branch from the trachea are the right main bronchus and the left main bronchus.

These are the widest and enter the lungs at each hilum , where they branch into narrower secondary bronchi known as lobar bronchi, and these branch into narrower tertiary bronchi known as segmental bronchi.

Further divisions of the segmental bronchi are known as 4th order, 5th order, and 6th order segmental bronchi, or grouped together as subsegmental bronchi.

[88] [89] The bronchi when too narrow to be supported by cartilage are known as bronchioles.

No gas exchange takes place in the bronchi.

Bruit – also called vascular murmur, [90] is the abnormal sound generated by turbulent flow of blood in an artery due to either an area of partial obstruction or a localized high rate of blood flow through an unobstructed artery.

[91] Bulimia nervosa – also known as simply bulimia , is an eating disorder characterized by binge eating followed by purging.

[92] Binge eating refers to eating a large amount of food in a short amount of time.

[92] Purging refers to the attempts to get rid of the food consumed.

[92] Buttocks – are two rounded portions of the anatomy, located on the posterior of the pelvic region and comprise a layer of fat superimposed on the gluteus maximus and gluteus medius muscles.

Physiologically, the buttocks enable weight to be taken off the feet while sitting.

Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References C [ edit ] Calcium – Calcium ions (Ca 2+ ) contribute to the physiology and biochemistry of organisms and the cell.

They play an important role in signal transduction pathways, [93] [94] where they act as a second messenger , in neurotransmitter release from neurons , in contraction of all muscle cell types, and in fertilization.

Many enzymes require calcium ions as a cofactor, those of the blood-clotting cascade being notable examples.

Extracellular calcium is also important for maintaining the potential difference across excitable cell membranes , as well as proper bone formation.

Calf – is the back portion of the lower leg in human anatomy.

The muscles within the calf correspond to the posterior compartment of the leg.

The two largest muscles within this compartment are known together as the calf muscle and attach to the heel via the Achilles tendon.

Several other, smaller muscles attach to the knee , the ankle , and via long tendons to the toes.

Cancer – is a group of diseases involving abnormal cell growth with the potential to invade or spread to other parts of the body.

[95] [96] These contrast with benign tumors , which do not spread to other parts of the body.

[96] Capillary – is a small blood vessel from 5 to 10 micrometres (μm) in diameter, and having a wall one endothelial cell thick.

They are the smallest blood vessels in the body: they convey blood between the arterioles and venules.

These microvessels are the site of exchange of many substances with the interstitial fluid surrounding them.

Carcinogen – is any substance, radionuclide , or radiation that promotes carcinogenesis , the formation of cancer.

This may be due to the ability to damage the genome or to the disruption of cellular metabolic processes.

Carcinogenesis – also called oncogenesis or tumorigenesis, is the formation of a cancer , whereby normal cells are transformed into cancer cells.

Cardiac arrest – a sudden loss of blood flow resulting from the failure of the heart to effectively pump.

[97] Symptoms include loss of consciousness and abnormal or absent breathing.

[98] [99] Some individuals may experience chest pain , shortness of breath , or nausea before cardiac arrest.

[99] If not treated within minutes, it typically leads to death.

[97] Cardiac catheterization – (heart cath or just cath), is the insertion of a catheter into a chamber or vessel of the heart.

This is done both for diagnostic and interventional purposes.

Cardiac muscle – (also called heart muscle or myocardium), is one of three types of vertebrate muscles , with the other two being skeletal and smooth muscles.

It is an involuntary, striated muscle that constitutes the main tissue of the walls of the heart.

The myocardium forms a thick middle layer between the outer layer of the heart wall (the epicardium ) and the inner layer (the endocardium ), with blood supplied via the coronary circulation.

It is composed of individual heart muscle cells ( cardiomyocytes ) joined by intercalated discs , encased by collagen fibres and other substances that form the extracellular matrix.

Cardiac surgery – or cardiovascular surgery, is surgery on the heart or great vessels performed by cardiac surgeons.

It is often used to treat complications of ischemic heart disease (for example, with coronary artery bypass grafting ); to correct congenital heart disease ; or to treat valvular heart disease from various causes, including endocarditis , rheumatic heart disease , and atherosclerosis.

It also includes heart transplantation.

Cardiology – is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the heart as well as parts of the circulatory system.

Cardiothoracic surgery – (also known as thoracic surgery) is the field of medicine involved in surgical treatment of organs inside the thorax (the chest)—generally treatment of conditions of the heart ( heart disease ) and lungs ( lung disease ).

Cardiovascular disease – (CVD), is a class of diseases that involve the heart or blood vessels.

[100] CVD includes coronary artery diseases (CAD) such as angina and myocardial infarction (commonly known as a heart attack).

[100] Other CVDs include stroke , heart failure , hypertensive heart disease , rheumatic heart disease , cardiomyopathy , heart arrhythmia , congenital heart disease , valvular heart disease , carditis , aortic aneurysms , peripheral artery disease , thromboembolic disease , and venous thrombosis.

[100] [101] Carotid artery, common – In anatomy, the left and right common carotid arteries (carotids) [102] [103] ) are arteries that supply the head and neck with oxygenated blood ; they divide in the neck to form the external and internal carotid arteries.

[104] [105] Carotid artery, external – The external carotid artery is a major artery of the head and neck.

It arises from the common carotid artery when it splits into the external and internal carotid artery.

It supplies blood to the face and neck.

[106] Carotid artery, internal – The internal carotid artery is a major paired artery , one on each side of the head and neck, in human anatomy.

They arise from the common carotid arteries where these bifurcate into the internal and external carotid arteries at cervical vertebral level 3 or 4; the internal carotid artery supplies the brain, while the external carotid nourishes other portions of the head, such as face, scalp, skull, and meninges.

Carotid artery stenosis – is a narrowing or constriction of any part of the carotid arteries , usually caused by atherosclerosis.

Carpal bones – Are the eight small bones that make up the wrist (or carpus) that connects the hand to the forearm.

In human anatomy , the main role of the wrist is to facilitate effective positioning of the hand and powerful use of the extensors and flexors of the forearm, and the mobility of individual carpal bones increase the freedom of movements at the wrist.

[107] Carpal tunnel syndrome – (CTS), is a medical condition due to compression of the median nerve as it travels through the wrist at the carpal tunnel.

[108] The main symptoms are pain , numbness and tingling in the thumb, index finger, middle finger and the thumb side of the ring fingers.

[108] Cartilage – is a resilient and smooth elastic tissue , a rubber-like padding that covers and protects the ends of long bones at the joints , and is a structural component of the rib cage , the ear , the nose , the bronchial tubes , the intervertebral discs , and many other body components.

It is not as hard and rigid as bone , but it is much stiffer and much less flexible than muscle.

The matrix of cartilage is made up of chondrin.

Cartilaginous joint – Cartilaginous joints are connected entirely by cartilage ( fibrocartilage or hyaline ).

[109] Cartilaginous joints allow more movement between bones than a fibrous joint but less than the highly mobile synovial joint.

Cartilaginous joints also forms the growth regions of immature long bones and the intervertebral discs of the spinal column.

Catheter – Is a thin tube made from medical grade materials serving a broad range of functions.

Catheters are medical devices that can be inserted in the body to treat diseases or perform a surgical procedure.

By modifying the material or adjusting the way catheters are manufactured, it is possible to tailor catheters for cardiovascular, urological, gastrointestinal, neurovascular, and ophthalmic applications.

Celiac disease – another way of spelling coeliac disease Cell biology – also called cytology, is a branch of biology that studies the structure and function of the cell , which is the basic unit of life.

[110] Cell biology is concerned with the physiological properties, metabolic processes, signaling pathways , life cycle , chemical composition and interactions of the cell with their environment.

Central nervous system – (CNS), is the part of the nervous system consisting of the brain and spinal cord.

Cephalic vein – is a superficial vein in the arm.

It communicates with the basilic vein via the median cubital vein at the elbow and is located in the superficial fascia along the anterolateral surface of the biceps brachii muscle.

Near the shoulder, the cephalic vein passes between the deltoid and pectoralis major muscles ( deltopectoral groove ) and through the deltopectoral triangle , where it empties into the axillary vein.

Cerebellum – (Latin for "little brain"), is a major feature of the hindbrain of all vertebrates.

Although usually smaller than the cerebrum , in some animals such as the mormyrid fishes it may be as large as or even larger.

[111] In humans, the cerebellum plays an important role in motor control.

It may also be involved in some cognitive functions such as attention and language as well as in regulating fear and pleasure responses, [112] but its movement-related functions are the most solidly established.

The human cerebellum does not initiate movement, but contributes to coordination , precision, and accurate timing: it receives input from sensory systems of the spinal cord and from other parts of the brain, and integrates these inputs to fine-tune motor activity.

[113] Cerebellar damage produces disorders in fine movement , equilibrium , posture , and motor learning in humans.

[113] Cerebrum – is a large part of the brain containing the cerebral cortex (of the two cerebral hemispheres ), as well as several subcortical structures, including the hippocampus , basal ganglia , and olfactory bulb.

In the human brain , the cerebrum is the uppermost region of the central nervous system.

The prosencephalon is the embryonic structure from which the cerebrum develops prenatally.

In mammals, the dorsal telencephalon, or pallium , develops into the cerebral cortex , and the ventral telencephalon, or subpallium , becomes the basal ganglia.

The cerebrum is also divided into approximately symmetric left and right cerebral hemispheres.

With the assistance of the cerebellum , the cerebrum controls all voluntary actions in the body.

Cervical cancer – is a cancer arising from the cervix.

[85] It is due to the abnormal growth of cells that have the ability to invade or spread to other parts of the body.

[114] Early on, typically no symptoms are seen.

[85] Later symptoms may include abnormal vaginal bleeding , pelvic pain , or pain during sexual intercourse.

[85] While bleeding after sex may not be serious, it may also indicate the presence of cervical cancer.

[115] Cervix – or cervix uteri, is the lower part of the uterus in the human female reproductive system.

The cervix is usually 2 to 3 cm long (~1 inch) and roughly cylindrical in shape, which changes during pregnancy.

The narrow, central cervical canal runs along its entire length, connecting the uterine cavity and the lumen of the vagina.

The opening into the uterus is called the internal os , and the opening into the vagina is called the external os.

The lower part of the cervix, known as the vaginal portion of the cervix (or ectocervix), bulges into the top of the vagina.

Cheek – The cheeks constitute the area of the face below the eyes and between the nose and the left or right ear.

"Buccal" means relating to the cheek.

In humans, the region is innervated by the buccal nerve.

The area between the inside of the cheek and the teeth and gums is called the vestibule or buccal pouch or buccal cavity and forms part of the mouth.

Chin – is the area of the face below the lower lip and including the mandibular prominence.

[116] [117] It is formed by the lower front of the mandible.

Chronic fatigue syndrome – (CFS), also referred to as myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME), is a medical condition characterized by long-term fatigue and other persistent symptoms that limit a person's ability to carry out ordinary daily activities.

[118] [119] Ciliary muscle – is a ring of smooth muscle [120] [121] in the eye 's middle layer ( vascular layer ) that controls accommodation for viewing objects at varying distances and regulates the flow of aqueous humor into Schlemm's canal.

It changes the shape of the lens within the eye, not the size of the pupil [122] which is carried out by the sphincter pupillae muscle and dilator pupillae.

Ciliary sulcus – The space between the anterior surface of the ciliary body of the eye and the posterior surface of the base of the iris.

It is one of the sites for intraocular lens implantation.

[123] Circulatory system – The circulatory system, also called the cardiovascular system or the vascular system, is an organ system that permits blood to circulate and transport nutrients (such as amino acids and electrolytes ), oxygen , carbon dioxide , hormones , and blood cells to and from the cells in the body to provide nourishment and help in fighting diseases , stabilize temperature and pH , and maintain homeostasis.

Clavicle – also known as the collar bone, is a long bone that serves as a strut between the shoulder blade and the sternum.

There are two, one on the right, and one on the left side of the trunk.

Along with the shoulder blade, the clavicles make up the shoulder girdle.

The clavicle has many functions.

It connects the axial and appendicular skeleton in conjunction with the scapula, helps extend range of motion , and protects neurovascular structures.

[124] Clinic – (or outpatient clinic or ambulatory care clinic) is a healthcare facility that is primarily focused on the care of outpatients.

Clinics can be privately operated or publicly managed and funded.

Clinical research – is a branch of healthcare science that determines the safety and effectiveness ( efficacy ) of medications , devices , diagnostic products and treatment regimens intended for human use.

These may be used for prevention, treatment, diagnosis or for relieving symptoms of a disease.

Clinical research is different from clinical practice.

In clinical practice established treatments are used, while in clinical research evidence is collected to establish a treatment.

Coeliac disease – Coeliac disease or celiac disease is a long-term autoimmune disorder that primarily affects the small intestine.

[125] Classic symptoms include gastrointestinal problems such as chronic diarrhoea , abdominal distention , malabsorption , loss of appetite and among children failure to grow normally.

[126] This often begins between six months and two years of age.

[126] Non-classic symptoms are more common, especially in people older than two years.

[127] [128] [129] [130] There may be mild or absent gastrointestinal symptoms, a wide number of symptoms involving any part of the body or no obvious symptoms.

[126] Coeliac disease was first described in childhood; [131] [127] however, it may develop at any age.

[126] [127] It is associated with other autoimmune diseases , such as diabetes mellitus type 1 and thyroiditis , among others.

[131] Colorectal surgery – is a field in medicine dealing with disorders of the rectum , anus , and colon.

[132] Common carotid artery – In anatomy, the left and right common carotid arteries (carotids) [102] [103] ) are arteries that supply the head and neck with oxygenated blood ; they divide in the neck to form the external and internal carotid arteries.

[104] [105] Common cold – also known simply as a cold, is a viral infectious disease of the upper respiratory tract that primarily affects the nose.

[133] The throat , sinuses , and larynx may also be affected.

[134] Signs and symptoms may appear less than two days after exposure to the virus.

[134] These may include coughing , sore throat , runny nose , sneezing , headache , and fever.

[135] [136] People usually recover in seven to ten days, [135] but some symptoms may last up to three weeks.

[137] Occasionally, those with other health problems may develop pneumonia.

[135] Common iliac artery – The common iliac arteries are two large arteries that originate from the aortic bifurcation at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra.

They end in front of the sacroiliac joint, one on either side, and each bifurcates into the external and internal iliac arteries.

Common iliac vein – The common iliac veins are formed by the external iliac veins and internal iliac veins.

The left and right common iliac veins come together in the abdomen at the level of the fifth lumbar vertebra , [138] forming the inferior vena cava.

They drain blood from the pelvis and lower limbs.

Both common iliac veins are accompanied along their course by common iliac arteries.

Coronary arteries – are the blood vessels ( arteries ) of coronary circulation , which transports oxygenated blood to the actual heart muscle.

The heart requires a continuous supply of oxygen to function and survive, much like any other tissue or organ of the body.

[139] Corpus callosum – also callosal commissure, is a wide, thick nerve tract consisting of a flat bundle of commissural fibers , beneath the cerebral cortex in the brain.

The corpus callosum is only found in placental mammals.

[140] It spans part of the longitudinal fissure , connecting the left and right cerebral hemispheres , enabling communication between them.

It is the largest white matter structure in the human brain , about ten centimetres in length and consisting of 200–300 million axonal projections.

[141] [142] Cranial nerves – are the nerves that emerge directly from the brain (including the brainstem ), in contrast to spinal nerves (which emerge from segments of the spinal cord ).

[143] Ten of the cranial nerves originate in the brainstem.

Cranial nerves relay information between the brain and parts of the body, primarily to and from regions of the head and neck.

[144] Cure – is a substance or procedure that ends a medical condition, such as a medication , a surgical operation , a change in lifestyle or even a philosophical mindset that helps end a person's sufferings; or the state of being healed, or cured.

Cytogenetics – is a branch of genetics that is concerned with how the chromosomes relate to cell behaviour, particularly to their behaviour during mitosis and meiosis.

[145] Cytokines – are a broad and loose category of small proteins (~5–20 kDa ) that are important in cell signaling.

Cytokines are peptides , and cannot cross the lipid bilayer of cells to enter the cytoplasm.

Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References D [ edit ] Decompression sickness – is a condition caused by inert gas bubbles forming in supersaturated tissues after a reduction in ambient pressure, and either obstructing perfusion or causing local damage.

Deep circumflex iliac vein – is formed by the union of the venae comitantes of the deep iliac circumflex artery , and joins the external iliac vein about 2 cm.

above the inguinal ligament.

It also receives small tributary branches from the thoracoepigastric vein [146] Deep temporal arteries – The deep temporal arteries, two in number, anterior and posterior, ascend between the temporalis and the pericranium.

They supply the muscle, and anastomose with the middle temporal artery.

The anterior communicates with the lacrimal artery by means of small branches which perforate the zygomatic bone and great wing of the sphenoid.

Definitive treatment – Medical treatment generally accepted as most appropriate for the condition.

Deltoid muscle – is the muscle forming the rounded contour of the human shoulder.

Anatomically, it appears to be made up of three distinct sets of fibers though electromyography suggests that it consists of at least seven groups that can be independently coordinated by the nervous system.

[147] Dentistry – also known as Dental and Oral Medicine, is a branch of medicine that consists of the study, diagnosis , prevention, and treatment of diseases , disorders, and conditions of the oral cavity , commonly in the dentition but also the oral mucosa , and of adjacent and related structures and tissues, particularly in the maxillofacial (jaw and facial) area.

[148] Dermatitis – also known as eczema, is a group of diseases that result in inflammation of the skin.

[149] These diseases are characterized by itchiness , red skin and a rash.

[149] In cases of short duration, there may be small blisters , while in long-term cases the skin may become thickened.

[149] The area of skin involved can vary from small to the entire body.

[149] [150] Diagnosis – Medical diagnosis (abbreviated Dx [151] or D S ) is the process of determining which disease or condition explains a person's symptoms and signs.

It is most often referred to as diagnosis with the medical context being implicit.

The information required for diagnosis is typically collected from a history and physical examination of the person seeking medical care.

Often, one or more diagnostic procedures, such as medical tests , are also done during the process.

Sometimes posthumous diagnosis is considered a kind of medical diagnosis.

Diabetes mellitus – (DM), commonly known as diabetes, is a group of metabolic disorders characterized by a high blood sugar level over a prolonged period.

[152] Symptoms of high blood sugar include frequent urination , increased thirst , and increased hunger.

[153] If left untreated, diabetes can cause many complications.

[153] Acute complications can include diabetic ketoacidosis , hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state , or death.

[154] Serious long-term complications include cardiovascular disease , stroke , chronic kidney disease , foot ulcers , and damage to the eyes.

[153] Dietary reference intake – (DRI), is a system of nutrition recommendations from the Institute of Medicine (IOM) of the National Academies (United States).

[155] Differential diagnosis – is the distinguishing of a particular disease or condition from others that present similar clinical features.

[156] Digestive system – The human digestive system consists of the gastrointestinal tract plus the accessory organs of digestion (the tongue , salivary glands , pancreas , liver , and gallbladder ).

Digestion involves the breakdown of food into smaller and smaller components, until they can be absorbed and assimilated into the body.

Disease – is an abnormal condition in an organism, or part of it, that negatively affects structure or function.

Disease can be caused by external factors, or internal dysfunctions, such as abnormal immune responses.

Dysbarism Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References E [ edit ] Ear – is the organ of hearing and, in mammals, balance.

In mammals, the ear is usually described as having three parts—the outer ear , the middle ear and the inner ear.

The outer ear consists of the pinna and the ear canal.

Since the outer ear is the only visible portion of the ear in most animals, the word "ear" often refers to the external part alone.

[157] The middle ear includes the tympanic cavity and the three ossicles.

The inner ear sits in the bony labyrinth , and contains structures which are key to several senses: the semicircular canals , which enable balance and eye tracking when moving; the utricle and saccule , which enable balance when stationary; and the cochlea , which enables hearing.

The ears of vertebrates are placed somewhat symmetrically on either side of the head, an arrangement that aids sound localisation.

Ear infection – Otitis is a general term for inflammation or infection of the ear , in both humans and other animals.

It is subdivided into the following: Otitis externa , external otitis, or "swimmer's ear", involves the outer ear and ear canal.

In external otitis, the ear hurts when touched or pulled.

Otitis media , or middle ear infection, involves the middle ear.

In otitis media, the ear is infected or clogged with fluid behind the ear drum, in the normally air-filled middle-ear space.

This very common childhood infection sometimes requires a surgical procedure called myringotomy and tube insertion.

Otitis interna , or labyrinthitis , involves the inner ear.

The inner ear includes sensory organs for balance and hearing.

When the inner ear is inflamed, vertigo is a common symptom.

Elbow – is the visible joint between the upper and lower parts of the arm.

It includes prominent landmarks such as the olecranon , the elbow pit , the lateral and medial epicondyles , and the elbow joint.

The elbow joint [158] is the synovial hinge joint [159] between the humerus in the upper arm and the radius and ulna in the forearm which allows the forearm and hand to be moved towards and away from the body.

[160] Embryology – is the branch of biology that studies the prenatal development of gametes (sex cells), fertilization , and development of embryos and fetuses.

Additionally, embryology encompasses the study of congenital disorders that occur before birth, known as teratology.

[161] Emergency medicine – also known as accident and emergency medicine, is the medical specialty concerned with the care of illnesses or injuries requiring immediate medical attention.

Emergency physicians care for unscheduled and undifferentiated patients of all ages.

As first-line providers, their primary responsibility is to initiate resuscitation and stabilization and to start investigations and interventions to diagnose and treat illnesses in the acute phase.

Endocrine system – is a chemical messenger system comprising feedback loops of hormones released by internal glands of an organism directly into the circulatory system , regulating distant target organs.

In humans , the major endocrine glands are the thyroid gland and the adrenal glands.

In vertebrates , the hypothalamus is the neural control center for all endocrine systems.

The study of the endocrine system and its disorders is known as endocrinology.

Endocrinology is a branch of internal medicine.

[162] Endocrinology – is a branch of biology and medicine dealing with the endocrine system , its diseases, and its specific secretions known as hormones.

It is also concerned with the integration of developmental events proliferation, growth, and differentiation, and the psychological or behavioral activities of metabolism , growth and development , tissue function, sleep , digestion , respiration , excretion , mood , stress , lactation , movement , reproduction , and sensory perception caused by hormones.

Specializations include behavioral endocrinology [163] [164] [165] and comparative endocrinology.

Epidemiology – is the study and analysis of the distribution (who, when, and where), patterns and determinants of health and disease conditions in defined populations.

It is a cornerstone of public health , and shapes policy decisions and evidence-based practice by identifying risk factors for disease and targets for preventive healthcare.

Epidemiologists help with study design, collection, and statistical analysis of data, amend interpretation and dissemination of results (including peer review and occasional systematic review ).

Epidemiology has helped develop methodology used in clinical research , public health studies, and, to a lesser extent, basic research in the biological sciences.

[166] Epiglottis – is a leaf-shaped flap in the throat that prevents food from entering the windpipe and the lungs.

It stands open during breathing, allowing air into the larynx.

During swallowing, it closes to prevent aspiration of food into the lungs, forcing the swallowed liquids or food to go along the esophagus toward the stomach instead.

It is thus the valve that diverts passage to either the trachea or the esophagus.

Epilepsy – is a group of neurological disorders characterized by recurrent epileptic seizures.

[167] [168] Epileptic seizures are episodes that can vary from brief and nearly undetectable periods to long periods of vigorous shaking.

[169] These episodes can result in physical injuries, including occasionally broken bones.

[169] In epilepsy, seizures have a tendency to recur and, as a rule, have no immediate underlying cause.

[167] Isolated seizures that are provoked by a specific cause such as poisoning are not deemed to represent epilepsy.

[170] Erectile dysfunction – (ED), also called impotence , is the type of sexual dysfunction in which the penis fails to become or stay erect during sexual activity.

It is the most common sexual problem in men.

[171] Through its connection to self-image and to problems in sexual relationships, erectile dysfunction can cause psychological harm.

Erector spinae muscles – The erector spinae or spinal erectors is a set of muscles that straighten and rotate the back.

Esophagus – The esophagus, ( American English ) or oesophagus ( British English ; see spelling differences ) ( / ɪ ˈ s ɒ f ə ɡ ə s / ), informally known as the food pipe or gullet, is an organ in vertebrates through which food passes, aided by peristaltic contractions , from the pharynx to the stomach.

The esophagus is a fibromuscular tube, about 25 cm (10 in) long in adults, which travels behind the trachea and heart , passes through the diaphragm and empties into the uppermost region of the stomach.

During swallowing, the epiglottis tilts backwards to prevent food from going down the larynx and lungs.

Extensor pollicis brevis muscle – In human anatomy , the extensor pollicis brevis is a skeletal muscle on the dorsal side of the forearm.

It lies on the medial side of, and is closely connected with, the abductor pollicis longus.

Extensor pollicis et indicis communis muscle – In human anatomy , the extensor pollicis et indicis communis is an aberrant muscle in the posterior compartment of forearm.

It was first described in 1863.

[172] The muscle has a prevalence from 0.

5% to 4%.

[173] Extensor pollicis longus muscle – In human anatomy , the extensor pollicis longus muscle (EPL) is a skeletal muscle located dorsally on the forearm.

It is much larger than the extensor pollicis brevis , the origin of which it partly covers and acts to stretch the thumb together with this muscle.

External carotid artery – is a major artery of the head and neck.

It arises from the common carotid artery when it splits into the external and internal carotid artery.

External carotid artery supplies blood to the face and neck.

[106] External iliac artery – The external iliac arteries are two major arteries which bifurcate off the common iliac arteries anterior to the sacroiliac joint of the pelvis.

External iliac vein – The external iliac veins are large veins that connect the femoral veins to the common iliac veins.

Their origin is at the inferior margin of the inguinal ligaments and they terminate when they join the internal iliac veins (to form the common iliac veins ).

Both external iliac veins are accompanied along their course by external iliac arteries.

External jugular vein – receives the greater part of the blood from the exterior of the cranium and the deep parts of the face , being formed by the junction of the posterior division of the retromandibular vein with the posterior auricular vein.

Eye – The human eye is a sense organ that reacts to light and allows vision.

Rod and cone cells in the retina are photoreceptive cells which are able to detect visible light and convey this information to the brain.

Eyes signal information which is used by the brain to elicit the perception of color, shape, depth, movement, and other features.

The eye is part of the sensory nervous system.

Similar to the eyes of other mammals , the human eye's non-image-forming photosensitive ganglion cells in the retina receive light signals which affect adjustment of the size of the pupil, regulation and suppression of the hormone melatonin , and entrainment of the circadian rhythm.

[174] Eye surgery – Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References F [ edit ] Face – is the front of an animal's head that features three of the head's sense organs , the eyes, nose, and mouth, and through which animals express many of their emotions.

[175] [176] The face is crucial for human identity , and damage such as scarring or developmental deformities affects the psyche adversely.

[175] Fallopian tube – The fallopian tubes, also known as uterine tubes or salpinges (singular salpinx), are tubes that stretch from the uterus to the ovaries , and are part of the female reproductive system.

The fertilized egg passes through the fallopian tubes from the ovaries of female mammals to the uterus.

The fallopian tube is simple columnar epithelium with hair-like extensions called cilia which carry the fertilized egg.

In other animals, the equivalent of a fallopian tube is an oviduct.

Fellowship (medicine) – is the period of medical training , in the United States and Canada, that a physician , dentist , or veterinarian may undertake after completing a specialty training program (residency).

During this time (usually more than one year), the physician is known as a fellow.

Fellows are capable of acting as an attending physician or a consultant physician in the specialist field in which they were trained, such as Internal Medicine or Pediatrics.

After completing a fellowship in the relevant sub-specialty, the physician is permitted to practice without direct supervision by other physicians in that sub-specialty, such as Cardiology or Oncology.

Female reproductive system – is made up of the internal and external sex organs that function in reproduction of new offspring.

In humans, the female reproductive system is immature at birth and develops to maturity at puberty to be able to produce gametes , and to carry a foetus to full term.

The internal sex organs are the uterus , fallopian tubes , and ovaries.

The uterus or womb accommodates the embryo which develops into the foetus.

The uterus also produces vaginal and uterine secretions which help the transit of sperm to the fallopian tubes.

The ovaries produce the ova ( egg cells ).

The external sex organs are also known as the genitals and these are the organs of the vulva including the labia , clitoris , and vaginal opening.

The vagina is connected to the uterus at the cervix.

[177] Femoral artery – is a large artery in the thigh and the main arterial supply to the thigh and leg.

It enters the thigh from behind the inguinal ligament as the continuation of the external iliac artery.

Femoral nerve – is a nerve in the thigh that supplies skin on the upper thigh and inner leg, and the muscles that extend the knee.

Femoral vein – In the human body , the femoral vein is a blood vessel that accompanies the femoral artery in the femoral sheath.

It begins at the adductor hiatus (an opening in the adductor magnus muscle) and is a continuation of the popliteal vein.

It ends at the inferior margin of the inguinal ligament , where it becomes the external iliac vein.

The femoral vein bears valves which are mostly bicuspid and whose number is variable between individuals and often between left and right leg.

[178] Femur – The femur, or thigh bone, is the proximal bone of the hindlimb in tetrapod vertebrate , the largest bone of the human body.

The head of the femur articulates with the acetabulum in the pelvic bone forming the hip joint , while the distal part of the femur articulates with the tibia and kneecap , forming the knee joint.

Fibromyalgia – Fibrous joint – Fibula – Finger – First aid – Flat bone – Foot – Forearm – Forehead – Frontal bone – Frontal nerve – Is the largest branch of the ophthalmic nerve (V 1 ), itself a branch of the trigeminal nerve (CN V).

[179] The frontal nerve branches from the ophthalmic nerve immediately before entering the superior orbital fissure.

In then travels superolateral to the annulus of Zinn between the lacrimal nerve and inferior ophthalmic vein.

After entering the orbit it travels anteriorly between the roof periosteum and the levator palpebrae superioris.

Midway between the apex and base of the orbit it divides into two branches, the supratrochlear nerve and supraorbital nerve.

The two branches of the frontal nerve provide sensory innervation to the skin of the forehead , mucosa of the frontal sinus , and the skin of the upper eyelid.

Frontalis muscle – Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References G [ edit ] Gallbladder – In vertebrates , the gallbladder is a small hollow organ where bile is stored and concentrated before it is released into the small intestine.

In humans, the pear-shaped gallbladder lies beneath the liver , although the structure and position of the gallbladder can vary significantly among animal species.

It receives and stores bile, produced by the liver, via the common hepatic duct and releases it via the common bile duct into the duodenum , where the bile helps in the digestion of fats.

Gamete – is a haploid cell that fuses with another haploid cell during fertilization in organisms that reproduce sexually.

[180] Gametes are an organism's reproductive cells , also referred to as sex cells.

[181] Ganglion – is a group of neuron cell bodies in the peripheral nervous system.

In the somatic nervous system this includes dorsal root ganglia and trigeminal ganglia among a few others.

In the autonomic nervous system there are both sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia which contain the cell bodies of postganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons respectively.

Gastrocnemius muscle – (plural gastrocnemii ) is a superficial two-headed muscle that is in the back part of the lower leg of humans.

It runs from its two heads just above the knee to the heel , a three joint muscle (knee, ankle and subtalar joints).

The muscle is named via Latin , from Greek γαστήρ ( gaster ) 'belly' or 'stomach' and κνήμη ( knḗmē ) 'leg', meaning 'stomach of leg' (referring to the bulging shape of the calf).

Gastroenterology – Gastroenterology [182] is the branch of medicine focused on the digestive system and its disorders.

Diseases affecting the gastrointestinal tract , which include the organs from mouth into anus , along the alimentary canal , are the focus of this speciality.

Gastrointestinal tract – The gastrointestinal tract, ( GI tract , GIT , digestive tract , digestion tract , alimentary canal ) is the tract from the mouth to the anus which includes all the organs of the digestive system in humans and other animals.

Food taken in through the mouth is digested to extract nutrients and absorb energy, and the waste expelled as feces.

The mouth , esophagus , stomach and intestines are all part of the gastrointestinal tract.

Gastrointestinal is an adjective meaning of or pertaining to the stomach and intestines.

A tract is a collection of related anatomic structures or a series of connected body organs.

Gene therapy – (also called human gene transfer ) is a medical field which focuses on the utilization of the therapeutic delivery of nucleic acids into a patient's cells as a drug to treat disease.

[183] [184] General surgery – is a surgical specialty that focuses on abdominal contents including esophagus , stomach , small intestine , large intestine , liver , pancreas , gallbladder , appendix and bile ducts , and often the thyroid gland (depending on local referral patterns).

They also deal with diseases involving the skin , breast , soft tissue , trauma , Peripheral artery disease and hernias and perform endoscopic procedures such as gastroscopy and colonoscopy.

Genetics – is a branch of biology concerned with the study of genes , genetic variation , and heredity in organisms.

[185] [186] [187] Genitourinary system – The genitourinary system, or urogenital system , are the organs of the reproductive system and the urinary system.

[188] These are grouped together because of their proximity to each other, their common embryological origin and the use of common pathways, like the male urethra.

Also, because of their proximity, the systems are sometimes imaged together.

[189] Geriatrics – or geriatric medicine , [190] is a specialty that focuses on health care of elderly people.

[191] It aims to promote health by preventing and treating diseases and disabilities in older adults.

[192] There is no set age at which patients may be under the care of a geriatrician , or geriatric physician , a physician who specializes in the care of elderly people.

Rather, this decision is determined by the individual patient's needs, and the availability of a specialist.

It is important to note the difference between geriatrics, the care of aged people, and gerontology , which is the study of the aging process itself.

The term geriatrics comes from the Greek γέρων geron meaning "old man", and ιατρός iatros meaning "healer".

However, geriatrics is sometimes called medical gerontology.

Gonad – A gonad, sex gland , or reproductive gland [193] is a mixed gland that produces the gametes (sex cells) and sex hormones of an organism.

In the female of the species the reproductive cells are the egg cells , and in the male the reproductive cells are the sperm.

[194] The male gonad, the testicle , produces sperm in the form of spermatozoa.

The female gonad, the ovary , produces egg cells.

Both of these gametes are haploid cells.

Some hermaphroditic animals have a type of gonad called an ovotestis.

Gout – is a form of inflammatory arthritis characterized by recurrent attacks of a red, tender, hot, and swollen joint.

[195] [196] Pain typically comes on rapidly, reaching maximal intensity in less than 12 hours.

[197] The joint at the base of the big toe is affected in about half of cases.

[198] It may also result in tophi , kidney stones , or urate nephropathy.

[197] Gracilis muscle – is the most superficial muscle on the medial side of the thigh.

It is thin and flattened, broad above, narrow and tapering below.

Great saphenous vein – ( GSV , alternately " long saphenous vein "; / s ə ˈ f iː n ə s / ) is a large, subcutaneous, superficial vein of the leg.

It is the longest vein in the body, running along the length of the lower limb, returning blood from the foot , leg and thigh to the deep femoral vein at the femoral triangle.

The guarding reflex in the urinary system is the gradual tightening of the external urethral sphincter , which prevents urine from exiting the bladder as the bladder fills and pressure on the sphincter increases.

At low levels of pressure this occurs unconsciously.

[199] Gynaecology – or gynecology (see spelling differences ) is the medical practice dealing with the health of the female reproductive system.

Almost all modern gynaecologists are also obstetricians (see obstetrics and gynaecology ).

In many areas, the specialities of gynaecology and obstetrics overlap.

The term means "the science of women ".

[200] Its counterpart is andrology , which deals with medical issues specific to the male reproductive system.

Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References H [ edit ] Hand – A hand is a prehensile , multi- fingered appendage located at the end of the forearm or forelimb of primates.

The human hand normally has five digits: four fingers plus one thumb ; [201] [202] these are often referred to collectively as five fingers, however, whereby the thumb is included as one of the fingers.

[201] [203] [204] It has 27 bones, not including sesmoid bones , the number of which varies between people, [205] 14 of which are the phalanges ( proximal , intermediate and distal ) of the fingers and thumb.

The metacarpal bones connect the fingers and the carpal bones of the wrist.

Each human hand has five metacarpals [206] and eight carpal bones.

Hand surgery – deals with both surgical and non-surgical treatment of conditions and problems that may take place in the hand or upper extremity (commonly from the tip of the hand to the shoulder) [207] including injury and infection.

[208] Hand surgery may be practiced by graduates of general surgery , orthopedic surgery and plastic surgery.

[207] Chiroplasty , or cheiroplasty , is plastic surgery of the hands.

[209] [210] Head – In human anatomy, the head is at the top of the human body.

It supports the face and is maintained by the skull , which itself encloses the brain.

The human head consists of a fleshy outer portion, which surrounds the bony skull.

The brain is enclosed within the skull.

There are 22 bones in the human head.

The head rests on the neck , and the seven cervical vertebrae support it.

The human head typically weighs between 2.

3 and 5 kilograms (5.

1 and 11.

0 lb) The face is the anterior part of the head, containing the eyes , nose , and mouth.

On either side of the mouth, the cheeks provide a fleshy border to the oral cavity.

The ears sit to either side of the head.

Health – as defined by the World Health Organization (WHO), is "a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.

" [211] [212] This definition has been subject to controversy, as it may have limited value for implementation.

[213] [214] [215] Health may be defined as the ability to adapt and manage physical, mental and social challenges throughout life.

[216] Health care – Health care, health-care, or healthcare is the maintenance or improvement of health via the prevention , diagnosis , treatment , recovery, or cure of disease , illness , injury , and other physical and mental impairments in people.

Health care is delivered by health professionals and allied health fields.

Physicians and physician associates are a part of these health professionals.

Dentistry , pharmacy , midwifery , nursing , medicine , optometry , audiology , psychology , occupational therapy , physical therapy , athletic training and other health professions are all part of health care.

It includes work done in providing primary care , secondary care , and tertiary care , as well as in public health.

Hearing – Heart – Heel – Hematemesis - Hematology – Hematoma - Hematuria - Hemodialysis - Hemolysis - Hemopathy - Hemoperfusion - Hemophilia - Hemoptysis - Hemorrhoid - Hyperhydrosis - High blood pressure – Hyperkalemia - Hip bone – Histology – Homeostasis – Hormone – Hospice – Hospital – Hospital medicine – Human back – Human body – Human brain – Human digestive system – Human eye – Human head – Human mouth – Human musculoskeletal system – Human nose – Human reproductive system – Human skeleton – Humerus – Hydrocele – Hypersalivation – Hypertension – Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References I [ edit ] Iliac artery, common – The common iliac arteries are two large arteries that originate from the aortic bifurcation at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra.

They end in front of the sacroiliac joint , one on either side, and each bifurcates into the external and internal iliac arteries.

Iliac artery, external – The external iliac arteries are two major arteries which bifurcate off the common iliac arteries anterior to the sacroiliac joint of the pelvis.

They proceed anterior and inferior along the medial border of the psoas major muscles.

They exit the pelvic girdle posterior and inferior to the inguinal ligament about one third laterally from the insertion point of the inguinal ligament on the pubic tubercle at which point they are referred to as the femoral arteries.

[217] The external iliac artery is usually the artery used to attach the renal artery to the recipient of a kidney transplant.

Ilium – (plural ilia ), is the uppermost and largest part of the hip bone , and appears in most vertebrates including mammals and birds , but not bony fish.

All reptiles have an ilium except snakes , although some snake species have a tiny bone which is considered to be an ilium.

[218] The ilium of the human is divisible into two parts, the body and the wing; the separation is indicated on the top surface by a curved line, the arcuate line, and on the external surface by the margin of the acetabulum.

Immune system – is a network of biological processes that protects an organism against disease.

It detects and responds to a wide variety of pathogens , from viruses to parasitic worms , as well as objects such as wood splinters , distinguishing them from the organism's own healthy tissue.

Many species have two major subsystems of the immune system.

The innate immune system provides a preconfigured response to broad groups of situations and stimuli.

The adaptive immune system provides a tailored response to each stimulus by learning to recognize molecules it has previously encountered.

Both use molecules and cells to perform their functions.

Immunohistochemistry – Immunology – is a branch of biology [219] that covers the study of immune systems [220] in all organisms.

[221] Immunology charts, measures, and contextualizes the physiological functioning of the immune system in states of both health and diseases; malfunctions of the immune system in immunological disorders (such as autoimmune diseases , hypersensitivities , [222] immune deficiency , [223] and transplant rejection [224] ); and the physical, chemical, and physiological characteristics of the components of the immune system in vitro , [225] in situ , and in vivo.

[226] Immunology has applications in numerous disciplines of medicine, particularly in the fields of organ transplantation, oncology, rheumatology, virology, bacteriology, parasitology, psychiatry, and dermatology.

Iliac vein, common – In human anatomy , the common iliac veins are formed by the external iliac veins and internal iliac veins.

The left and right common iliac veins come together in the abdomen at the level of the fifth lumbar vertebra , [227] forming the inferior vena cava.

They drain blood from the pelvis and lower limbs.

Both common iliac veins are accompanied along their course by common iliac arteries.

Iliac vein, deep circumflex – Iliac vein, external – Iliac vein, internal – Index finger – Infectious diseases (medical specialty) – Inferior oblique muscle – Inferior thyroid artery – Inferior vena cava – Influenza – Inspection (medicine) – Integumentary system – Intensive care medicine – Internal carotid artery – Internal iliac vein – Internal jugular vein – Internal medicine – Internship (medicine) – Interventional cardiology – Interventional radiology – Ischium – Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References J [ edit ] Jaundice - also known as icterus, is a yellowish or greenish pigmentation of the skin and whites of the eyes due to high bilirubin levels.

[228] [229] It is commonly associated with itchiness.

[230] The feces may be pale and the urine dark.

[231] Jaundice in babies occurs in over half in the first week following birth and does not pose a serious threat in most.

[228] [229] If bilirubin levels in babies are very high for too long, a type of brain damage, known as kernicterus , may occur.

[232] Jaw – The jaw is any opposable articulated structure at the entrance of the mouth , typically used for grasping and manipulating food.

The term jaws is also broadly applied to the whole of the structures constituting the vault of the mouth and serving to open and close it and is part of the body plan of humans and most animals.

Jejunum - is the second part of the small intestine in humans and most higher vertebrates , including mammals , reptiles , and birds.

Its lining is specialised for the absorption by enterocytes of small nutrient molecules which have been previously digested by enzymes in the duodenum.

Joint – A joint or articulation (or articular surface) is the connection made between bones in the body which link the skeletal system into a functional whole.

[233] [234] [235] They are constructed to allow for different degrees and types of movement.

Some joints, such as the knee , elbow , and shoulder , are self-lubricating, almost frictionless, and are able to withstand compression and maintain heavy loads while still executing smooth and precise movements.

[235] Other joints such as sutures between the bones of the skull permit very little movement (only during birth) in order to protect the brain and the sense organs.

[235] The connection between a tooth and the jawbone is also called a joint, and is described as a fibrous joint known as a gomphosis.

Joints are classified both structurally and functionally.

[236] Jugular vein – The jugular veins are veins that take deoxygenated blood from the head back to the heart via the superior vena cava.

K [ edit ] Keratogenesis – The production of horny cells in the epidermis.

[237] Keratopathy - Kidney – The kidneys are two reddish-brown bean-shaped organs found in vertebrates.

They are located on the left and right in the retroperitoneal space , and in adult humans are about 12 centimetres ( 4 + 1 ⁄ 2 inches) in length.

[238] [239] They receive blood from the paired renal arteries ; blood exits into the paired renal veins.

Each kidney is attached to a ureter , a tube that carries excreted urine to the bladder.

Knee – In humans and other primates , the knee joins the thigh with the leg and consists of two joints : one between the femur and tibia (tibiofemoral joint), and one between the femur and patella (patellofemoral joint).

[240] It is the largest joint in the human body.

[241] The knee is a modified hinge joint , which permits flexion and extension as well as slight internal and external rotation.

The knee is vulnerable to injury and to the development of osteoarthritis.

Korsakoff syndrome - (KS) [242] is an amnestic disorder caused by thiamine (vitamin B 1 ) deficiency typically associated with prolonged use of alcohol.

[243] The syndrome and psychosis are named after Sergei Korsakoff , the Russian neuropsychiatrist who discovered it during the late 19th century.

This neurological disorder is caused by a lack of thiamine in the brain , and is also exacerbated by the neurotoxic effects of alcohol.

When Wernicke encephalopathy accompanies Korsakoff syndrome the combination is called Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome ; however, a recognized episode of Wernicke encephalopathy is not always obvious.

L [ edit ] Large intestine –The large intestine, also known as the large bowel or colon, is the last part of the gastrointestinal tract and of the digestive system in vertebrates.

Water is absorbed here and the remaining waste material is stored as feces before being removed by defecation.

[244] Laryngeal prominence – The Adam's apple, or laryngeal prominence, colloquially known as the neck triangle, is the lump or protrusion in the human neck formed by the angle of the thyroid cartilage surrounding the larynx seen especially in males.

Laryngeal ventricle – (also called the ventricle of the larynx , laryngeal sinus , or Morgagni's sinus ) [245] is a fusiform fossa , situated between the vestibular and vocal folds on either side, and extending nearly their entire length.

There is also a sinus of Morgagni in the pharynx.

Laryngospasm – Ligament – is the fibrous connective tissue that connects bones to other bones.

Lips – are a visible body part at the mouth of many animals, including humans.

Lips are soft, movable, and serve as the opening for food intake and in the articulation of sound and speech.

Human lips are a tactile sensory organ, and can be an erogenous zone when used in kissing and other acts of intimacy.

Little finger – or pinky finger , also known as the fifth digit , or pinkie , is the most ulnar and smallest finger of the human hand , opposite the thumb , and next to the ring finger.

Liver – is an organ only found in vertebrates which detoxifies various metabolites , synthesizes proteins and produces biochemicals necessary for digestion and growth.

[246] [247] [248] In humans, it is located in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen , below the diaphragm.

Its other roles in metabolism include the regulation of glycogen storage , decomposition of red blood cells , and the production of hormones.

[248] Long bone – Lumbar vertebrae – Lung – Lung cancer – Lupus erythematosus – Lymph – Lymphatic system – Lymphatic vessel – Lymph node – Lymphocyte – Lymphoma - Cancer of the lymphatic system.

Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References M [ edit ] Major depressive disorder – (MDD), also known simply as depression, is a mental disorder characterized by at least two weeks of pervasive low mood.

Low self-esteem , loss of interest in normally enjoyable activities, low energy, and pain without a clear cause are common symptoms.

[249] Those affected may also occasionally have delusions or hallucinations.

[249] Some people have periods of depression separated by years, while others nearly always have symptoms present.

[250] Major depression is more severe and lasts longer than sadness , which is a normal part of life.

[250] Male reproductive system – Mammary gland – Mandible – The mandible, lower jaw or jawbone is the largest, strongest and lowest bone in the human face.

[251] It forms the lower jaw and holds the lower teeth in place.

The mandible sits beneath the maxilla.

It is the only movable bone of the skull (discounting the ossicles of the middle ear).

[252] Masseter muscle – In human anatomy, the masseter is one of the muscles of mastication.

Found only in mammals, it is particularly powerful in herbivores to facilitate chewing of plant matter.

[253] The most obvious muscle of mastication is the masseter muscle, since it is the most superficial and one of the strongest.

Maternal-fetal medicine – (MFM), also known as perinatology , is a branch of medicine that focuses on managing health concerns of the mother and fetus prior to, during, and shortly after pregnancy.

Maxilla – in vertebrates , is the upper fixed (not fixed in Neopterygii ) bone of the jaw formed from the fusion of two maxillary bones.

In humans, the upper jaw includes the hard palate in the front of the mouth.

[254] [255] The two maxillary bones are fused at the intermaxillary suture, forming the anterior nasal spine.

This is similar to the mandible (lower jaw), which is also a fusion of two mandibular bones at the mandibular symphysis.

The mandible is the movable part of the jaw.

MCAT – Medical College Admission Test.

Medical biology – Medical classification – A medical classification is a list of standardized codes used in the process of medical coding and medical billing.

Medical coding – The practice of assigning statistical codes to medical statements, such as those made during a hospital stay.

Closely related to medical billing.

Medical College Admission Test – (MCAT), is a computer-based standardized examination for prospective medical students in the United States , Australia , [256] Canada , and Caribbean Islands.

It is designed to assess problem solving, critical thinking, written analysis and knowledge of scientific concepts and principles.

Medical device – is any device intended to be used for medical purposes.

Medical devices benefit patients by helping health care providers diagnose and treat patients and helping patients overcome sickness or disease, improving their quality of life.

Significant potential for hazards are inherent when using a device for medical purposes and thus medical devices must be proved safe and effective with reasonable assurance before regulating governments allow marketing of the device in their country.

As a general rule, as the associated risk of the device increases the amount of testing required to establish safety and efficacy also increases.

Further, as associated risk increases the potential benefit to the patient must also increase.

Medical diagnosis – (abbreviated Dx [151] or D S ) is the process of determining which disease or condition explains a person's symptoms and signs.

It is most often referred to as diagnosis with the medical context being implicit.

The information required for diagnosis is typically collected from a history and physical examination of the person seeking medical care.

Often, one or more diagnostic procedures , such as medical tests , are also done during the process.

Sometimes posthumous diagnosis is considered a kind of medical diagnosis.

Medical ethics – Medical history – Medical imaging – Medical laboratory – Medical research – Medical school – Medical sign – Medical speciality – Medication – Medulla oblongata – Metacarpal bones – Metatarsal bones – Microbiology – Middle finger – Middle temporal artery – Molecular biology – Mouth – Muscle – Muscular system – Musculoskeletal system – Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References N [ edit ] Nail – A nail is a claw-like keratinous plate at the tip of the fingers and toes in most primates.

Nails correspond to claws found in other animals.

Fingernails and toenails are made of a tough protective protein called alpha-keratin which is found in the hooves, hair, claws and horns of vertebrates.

[257] Nanobiotechnology – Nanobiotechnology, bionanotechnology, and nanobiology are terms that refer to the intersection of nanotechnology and biology.

[258] Given that the subject is one that has only emerged very recently, bionanotechnology and nanobiotechnology serve as blanket terms for various related technologies.

Nasal cavity – is a large, air-filled space above and behind the nose in the middle of the face.

The nasal septum divides the cavity into two cavities, [179] also known as fossae.

[259] Each cavity is the continuation of one of the two nostrils.

The nasal cavity is the uppermost part of the respiratory system and provides the nasal passage for inhaled air from the nostrils to the nasopharynx and rest of the respiratory tract.

The paranasal sinuses surround and drain into the nasal cavity.

Nasopharynx – The upper portion of the pharynx, the nasopharynx, extends from the base of the skull to the upper surface of the soft palate.

[260] It includes the space between the internal nares and the soft palate and lies above the oral cavity.

The adenoids , also known as the pharyngeal tonsils, are lymphoid tissue structures located in the posterior wall of the nasopharynx.

Waldeyer's tonsillar ring is an annular arrangement of lymphoid tissue in both the nasopharynx and oropharynx.

The nasopharynx is lined by respiratory epithelium that is pseudostratified, columnar, and ciliated.

Navel – The navel (clinically known as the umbilicus, colloquially known as the belly button) is a protruding, flat, or hollowed area on the abdomen at the attachment site of the umbilical cord.

[261] All placental mammals have a navel.

Nephrology – is a specialty of medicine that concerns with study of the kidneys , specifically normal kidney function and kidney disease , the preservation of kidney health, and the treatment of kidney disease, from diet and medication to renal replacement therapy ( dialysis and kidney transplantation ).

Nerve – is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibres called axons , in the peripheral nervous system.

A nerve transmits electrical impulses and is the basic unit of the peripheral nervous system.

A nerve provides a common pathway for the electrochemical nerve impulses called action potentials that are transmitted along each of the axons to peripheral organs or, in the case of sensory nerves , from the periphery back to the central nervous system.

Each axon within the nerve is an extension of an individual neuron , along with other supportive cells such as some Schwann cells that coat the axons in myelin.

Nervous system – is a highly complex part of an animal that coordinates its actions and sensory information by transmitting signals to and from different parts of its body.

The nervous system detects environmental changes that impact the body, then works in tandem with the endocrine system to respond to such events.

[262] Neurology – is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the nervous system.

Neurology deals with the diagnosis and treatment of all categories of conditions and disease involving the central and peripheral nervous systems (and their subdivisions, the autonomic and somatic nervous systems ), including their coverings, blood vessels, and all effector tissue, such as muscle.

[263] Neurological practice relies heavily on the field of neuroscience , the scientific study of the nervous system.

Neuroscience – (or neurobiology), is the scientific study of the nervous system.

[264] It is a multidisciplinary science that combines physiology , anatomy , molecular biology , developmental biology , cytology , mathematical modeling , and psychology to understand the fundamental and emergent properties of neurons and neural circuits.

[265] [266] [267] [268] [269] Neurosurgery – or neurological surgery, is the medical specialty concerned with the prevention, diagnosis, surgical treatment, and rehabilitation of disorders which affect any portion of the nervous system including the brain , spinal cord , central and peripheral nervous system, and cerebrovascular system.

[270] Nose – The human nose is the most protruding part of the face.

It bears the nostrils and is the first organ of the respiratory system.

It is also the principal organ in the olfactory system.

The shape of the nose is determined by the nasal bones and the nasal cartilages , including the nasal septum which separates the nostrils and divides the nasal cavity into two.

On average the nose of a male is larger than that of a female.

Nuclear medicine – is a medical specialty involving the application of radioactive substances in the diagnosis and treatment of disease.

Nuclear medicine imaging, in a sense, is " radiology done inside out" or "endoradiology" because it records radiation emitting from within the body rather than radiation that is generated by external sources like X-rays.

In addition, nuclear medicine scans differ from radiology, as the emphasis is not on imaging anatomy, but on the function.

For such reason, it is called a physiological imaging modality.

Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission tomography (PET) scans are the two most common imaging modalities in nuclear medicine.

[271] Nutrition – is the science that interprets the nutrients and other substances in food in relation to maintenance, growth, reproduction, health and disease of an organism.

It includes ingestion, absorption , assimilation , biosynthesis , catabolism and excretion.

[272] O [ edit ] Oblique muscle of auricle – The oblique muscle of auricle (oblique auricular muscle or Tod muscle [273] ) is an intrinsic muscle of the outer ear.

The oblique muscle of auricle is placed on the cranial surface of the pinna.

It consists of a few fibers extending from the upper and back part of the concha to the convexity immediately above it.

[274] Obstetrics – is the field of study concentrated on pregnancy , childbirth and the postpartum period.

As a medical specialty , obstetrics is combined with gynecology under the discipline known as obstetrics and gynecology (OB/GYN), which is a surgical field.

[275] Obstetrics and gynaecology – Obstetrics and gynaecology (British English) or obstetrics and gynecology (American English) is the medical specialty that encompasses the two subspecialties of obstetrics (covering pregnancy , childbirth , and the postpartum period ) and gynecology (covering the health of the female reproductive system – vagina , uterus , ovaries , and breasts ).

It is commonly abbreviated as OB-GYN or OB/GYN in US English, and as obs and gynae or O&G in British English.

Occipital bone – is a cranial dermal bone and the main bone of the occiput (back and lower part of the skull ).

It is trapezoidal in shape and curved on itself like a shallow dish.

The occipital bone overlies the occipital lobes of the cerebrum.

At the base of skull in the occipital bone, there is a large oval opening called the foramen magnum , which allows the passage of the spinal cord.

Ocular surgery – Olfaction – or the sense of smell, [276] is the process of creating the perception of smell.

[277] It occurs when an odor binds to a receptor within the nose, transmitting a signal through the olfactory system.

Olfaction has many purposes, including detecting hazards, pheromones , and plays a role in taste.

Oncology – is a branch of medicine that deals with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer.

A medical professional who practices oncology is an oncologist.

[278] Ophthalmology – is a branch of medicine and surgery which deals with the diagnosis and treatment of eye disorders.

[279] An ophthalmologist is a specialist in ophthalmology.

[280] The credentials include a degree in medicine, followed by additional four to five years of ophthalmology residency training.

Ophthalmology residency training programs may require a one-year pre-residency training in internal medicine, pediatrics, or general surgery.

Additional specialty training (or fellowship) may be sought in a particular aspect of eye pathology.

[281] Ophthalmologists are allowed to use medications to treat eye diseases, implement laser therapy, and perform surgery when needed.

[282] Ophthalmologists may participate in academic research on the diagnosis and treatment for eye disorders.

[283] Optometry – is a health care profession that involves examining the eyes and applicable visual systems for defects or abnormalities as well as prescribing the correction of refractive error with glasses or contact lenses and the treatment of eye diseases.

Organ – is a group of tissues with similar functions.

Plant life and animal life rely on many organs that co-exist in organ systems.

[284] Oral and maxillofacial surgery – is a surgical specialty focusing on reconstructive surgery of the face , facial trauma surgery , the oral cavity , head and neck , mouth , and jaws , as well as facial cosmetic surgery.

Orbicularis oculi muscle – Orbicularis oris muscle – Orthopedic surgery – Ossicles – Otitis – Otorhinolaryngology – Ovary – Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References P [ edit ] Palate – is the roof of the mouth in humans and other mammals.

It separates the oral cavity from the nasal cavity.

[285] A similar structure is found in crocodilians , but in most other tetrapods , the oral and nasal cavities are not truly separated.

The palate is divided into two parts, the anterior, bony hard palate and the posterior, fleshy soft palate (or velum).

[286] [287] Palliative care – (derived from the Latin root palliare, or "to cloak") is an interdisciplinary medical caregiving approach aimed at optimizing quality of life and mitigating suffering among people with serious, complex illness.

[288] Within the published literature, many definitions of palliative care exist; most notably, the World Health Organization describes palliative care as "an approach that improves the quality of life of patients and their families facing the problems associated with life-threatening illness, through the prevention and relief of suffering by means of early identification and impeccable assessment and treatment of pain and other problems, physical, psychosocial, and spiritual.

" [289] In the past, palliative care was a disease specific approach, but today the World Health Organization takes a more broad approach, that the principles of palliative care should be applied as early as possible to any chronic and ultimately fatal illness.

[290] Palpation – is the process of using one's hands to check the body, especially while perceiving/diagnosing a disease or illness.

[291] Pancreas – is an organ of the digestive system and endocrine system of vertebrates.

In humans, it is located in the abdomen behind the stomach and functions as a gland.

The pancreas has both an endocrine and a digestive exocrine function.

As an endocrine gland , it functions mostly to regulate blood sugar levels , secreting the hormones insulin , glucagon , somatostatin , and pancreatic polypeptide.

As a part of the digestive system, it functions as an exocrine gland secreting pancreatic juice into the duodenum through the pancreatic duct.

This juice contains bicarbonate , which neutralizes acid entering the duodenum from the stomach; and digestive enzymes , which break down carbohydrates , proteins , and fats in food entering the duodenum from the stomach.

Papillary - In oncology , papillary refers to neoplasms with projections (" papillae ", from Latin, ' nipple ') that have fibrovascular cores.

Parasitology – is the study of parasites , their hosts , and the relationship between them.

As a biological discipline , the scope of parasitology is not determined by the organism or environment in question but by their way of life.

This means it forms a synthesis of other disciplines, and draws on techniques from fields such as cell biology , bioinformatics , biochemistry , molecular biology , immunology , genetics , evolution and ecology.

Parathyroid glands – are small endocrine glands in the neck of humans and other tetrapods.

Humans usually have four parathyroid glands, located on the back of the thyroid gland in variable locations.

The parathyroid gland produces and secretes parathyroid hormone in response to a low blood calcium, which plays a key role in regulating the amount of calcium in the blood and within the bones.

Parkinson's disease – Patella – Pathology – Pectineus muscle – Pectoralis major muscle – Pectoralis minor muscle – Pediatrics – Pelvis – Penis – Percussion (medicine) – Peripheral nervous system – Peripheral vision – Phalanx bone – Pharmacology – Pharynx – Physician – Physical examination – Physiology – Pineal gland – Pituitary gland – Placenta – Plastic surgery – Plexus – A branching network of vessels or nerves.

Pons – Posterior tibial artery – Preventive healthcare – Prognosis – Prostate – Psychiatry – Pubis – Pulmonary artery – Pulmonary circulation – Pulmonary vein – Pulmonology – Pulse – Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References Q [ edit ] Quadriplegia – Tetraplegia, also known as quadriplegia, is paralysis caused by illness or injury that results in the partial or total loss of use of all four limbs and torso; paraplegia is similar but does not affect the arms.

The loss is usually sensory and motor, which means that both sensation and control are lost.

The paralysis may be flaccid or spastic.

R [ edit ] Radial artery – In human anatomy , the radial artery is the main artery of the lateral aspect of the forearm.

Radial nerve – is a nerve in the human body that supplies the posterior portion of the upper limb.

It innervates the medial and lateral heads of the triceps brachii muscle of the arm, as well as all 12 muscles in the posterior osteofascial compartment of the forearm and the associated joints and overlying skin.

It originates from the brachial plexus , carrying fibers from the ventral roots of spinal nerves C5, C6, C7, C8 & T1.

[292] Radiology – is the medical discipline that uses medical imaging to diagnose and treat diseases within the body.

Radius – The radius, or radial bone, is one of the two large bones of the forearm , the other being the ulna.

It extends from the lateral side of the elbow to the thumb side of the wrist and runs parallel to the ulna.

The ulna is usually slightly longer than the radius, but the radius is thicker.

Therefore, the radius is considered to be the larger of the two.

It is a long bone , prism -shaped and slightly curved longitudinally.

Rectum – is the final straight portion of the large intestine in humans and some other mammals , and the gut in others.

The adult human rectum is about 12 centimetres (4.

7 in) long, [293] and begins at the rectosigmoid junction, the end of the sigmoid colon , at the level of the third sacral vertebra or the sacral promontory depending upon what definition is used.

[294] Its caliber is similar to that of the sigmoid colon at its commencement, but it is dilated near its termination, forming the rectal ampulla.

It terminates at the level of the anorectal ring (the level of the puborectalis sling) or the dentate line , again depending upon which definition is used.

[294] In humans, the rectum is followed by the anal canal which is about 4 centimetres (1.

6 in) long, before the gastrointestinal tract terminates at the anal verge.

The word rectum comes from the Latin rectum intestinum , meaning straight intestine.

Rectus abdominis muscle – also known as the abdominal muscle , is a paired muscle running vertically on each side of the anterior wall of the human abdomen, as well as that of some other mammals.

There are two parallel muscles, separated by a midline band of connective tissue called the linea alba.

It extends from the pubic symphysis , pubic crest and pubic tubercle inferiorly, to the xiphoid process and costal cartilages of ribs V to VII superiorly.

[295] The proximal attachments are the pubic crest and the pubic symphysis.

It attaches distally at the costal cartilages of ribs 5-7 and the xiphoid process of the sternum.

[296] Rectus femoris muscle – is one of the four quadriceps muscles of the human body.

The others are the vastus medialis , the vastus intermedius (deep to the rectus femoris), and the vastus lateralis.

All four parts of the quadriceps muscle attach to the patella (knee cap) by the quadriceps tendon.

The rectus femoris is situated in the middle of the front of the thigh ; it is fusiform in shape, and its superficial fibers are arranged in a bipenniform manner, the deep fibers running straight ( Latin : rectus ) down to the deep aponeurosis.

Its functions are to flex the thigh at the hip joint and to extend the leg at the knee joint.

[297] Red blood cell – The most common type of blood cell and the vertebrate's principal means of delivering oxygen to the body tissues — via blood flow through the circulatory system.

Red blood cells take up oxygen in the lungs and release it into tissues while squeezing through the body's capillaries.

Renal artery – Renal vein – Reproductive system – Residency (medicine) – Respiratory system – Rheumatology – Rib cage – Ring finger – S [ edit ] Sacrum – The sacrum (plural: sacra or sacrums [298] ), in human anatomy , is a large, triangular bone at the base of the spine that forms by the fusing of sacral vertebrae S1–S5 between 18 and 30 years of age.

[299] Salivary gland – The salivary glands in mammals are exocrine glands that produce saliva through a system of ducts.

Humans have three paired major salivary glands ( parotid , submandibular , and sublingual ), a pair of seromucous tubarial glands (discovered in 2020) as well as hundreds of minor salivary glands.

[300] Salivary glands can be classified as serous , mucous or seromucous (mixed).

Saphenous nerve – (long or internal saphenous nerve) is the largest cutaneous branch of the femoral nerve.

It is a strictly sensory nerve, and has no motor function.

Saphenous vein, great – Saphenous vein, small – Sartorius muscle – Scalp – Scapula – Sciatic nerve – Scrotum – Sebaceous gland – Seminal vesicle – Sensory nervous system – Sensory processing – Serratus anterior muscle – Serratus posterior inferior muscle – Serratus posterior superior muscle – Skeletal muscle – Skin – Skull – Small intestine – Small saphenous vein – Smooth muscle tissue – Special senses – Specialty (medicine) – Spinal cord – Spinal nerve – Sole – Soleus muscle – Spleen – Sports medicine – Sternohyoid muscle – Sternum – Stomach – Striated muscle tissue – Subclavian artery – Subcutaneous tissue – Superficial temporal artery – Superior oblique muscle – Superior thyroid artery – Superior vena cava – Surgery – Sweat gland – Symptom – Synovial bursa – Synovial joint – Synovial membrane – Systemic lupus erythematosus – Systems biology – Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References T [ edit ] Tarsus – In the human body , the tarsus is a cluster of seven articulating bones in each foot situated between the lower end of the tibia and the fibula of the lower leg and the metatarsus.

It is made up of the midfoot ( cuboid , medial, intermediate, and lateral cuneiform , and navicular ) and hindfoot ( talus and calcaneus ).

Taste – The gustatory system or sense of taste is the sensory system that is partially responsible for the perception of taste (flavor).

[301] Taste is the perception produced or stimulated when a substance in the mouth reacts chemically with taste receptor cells located on taste buds in the oral cavity , mostly on the tongue.

Taste, along with smell ( olfaction ) and trigeminal nerve stimulation (registering texture, pain, and temperature), determines flavors of food and other substances.

Humans have taste receptors on taste buds and other areas including the upper surface of the tongue and the epiglottis.

[302] [303] The gustatory cortex is responsible for the perception of taste.

Teeth – Temple – Temporal arteries, deep – Temporal artery, middle – Temporal artery, superficial – Temporal muscle – Tendon – Tensor fasciae latae muscle – Testicle – Thigh – Thoracic diaphragm – Thorax – Throat – Thumb – Thymus – Thyroid – Thyroid artery, inferior – Thyroid artery, superior – Thyroid ima artery – Tibia – Tibialis anterior muscle – Tibialis posterior muscle – Tissue – Toe – Toll-like receptor – Tongue – Toxicology – Trachea – Trapezius muscle – Triceps brachii muscle – Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References U [ edit ] Ulna – is a long bone found in the forearm that stretches from the elbow to the smallest finger, and when in anatomical position , is found on the medial side of the forearm.

It runs parallel to the radius , the other long bone in the forearm.

The ulna is usually slightly longer than the radius, but the radius is thicker.

Therefore, the radius is considered to be the larger of the two.

Ulnar artery – is the main blood vessel , with oxygenated blood , of the medial aspects of the forearm.

It arises from the brachial artery and terminates in the superficial palmar arch, which joins with the superficial branch of the radial artery.

It is palpable on the anterior and medial aspect of the wrist.

Ulnar nerve – In human anatomy , the ulnar nerve is a nerve that runs near the ulna bone.

The ulnar collateral ligament of elbow joint is in relation with the ulnar nerve.

The nerve is the largest in the human body unprotected by muscle or bone, so injury is common.

[304] This nerve is directly connected to the little finger , and the adjacent half of the ring finger , innervating the palmar aspect of these fingers, including both front and back of the tips , perhaps as far back as the fingernail beds.

Ureter – The ureters are tubes made of smooth muscle that propel urine from the kidneys to the urinary bladder.

In the human adult, the ureters are usually 20–30 cm (8–12 in) long and around 3–4 mm (0.

12–0.

16 in) in diameter.

The ureter is lined by urothelial cells, a type of transitional epithelium , and has an additional smooth muscle layer in third closest to the bladder that assists with peristalsis.

Urethra – The urethra is a tube that connects the urinary bladder to the urinary meatus for the removal of urine from the body of both females and males.

In human females and other primates , the urethra connects to the urinary meatus above the vagina , whereas in marsupials , the female's urethra empties into the urogenital sinus.

[305] Females use their urethra only for urinating, but males use their urethra for both urination and ejaculation.

[306] The external urethral sphincter is a striated muscle that allows voluntary control over urination.

[307] The internal sphincter , formed by the involuntary smooth muscles lining the bladder neck and urethra, receives its nerve supply by the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system.

[308] The internal sphincter is present both in males and females.

[309] [310] [311] Urinary bladder – The urinary bladder, or simply bladder, is a hollow muscular organ in humans and other vertebrates that stores urine from the kidneys before disposal by urination.

In the human the bladder is a hollow muscular , and distensible organ that sits on the pelvic floor.

Urine enters the bladder via the ureters and exits via the urethra.

The typical human bladder will hold between 300 and 500 ml (10.

14 and 16.

91 fl oz ) before the urge to empty occurs, but can hold considerably more.

[312] [313] Urinary system – The urinary system, also known as the renal system or urinary tract, consists of the kidneys , ureters , bladder , and the urethra.

The purpose of the urinary system is to eliminate waste from the body, regulate blood volume and blood pressure, control levels of electrolytes and metabolites, and regulate blood pH.

The urinary tract is the body's drainage system for the eventual removal of urine.

[314] The kidneys have an extensive blood supply via the renal arteries which leave the kidneys via the renal vein.

Each kidney consists of functional units called nephrons.

Following filtration of blood and further processing, wastes (in the form of urine ) exit the kidney via the ureters, tubes made of smooth muscle fibres that propel urine towards the urinary bladder, where it is stored and subsequently expelled from the body by urination ( voiding ).

The female and male urinary system are very similar, differing only in the length of the urethra.

[315] Urology – also known as genitourinary surgery, is the branch of medicine that focuses on surgical and medical diseases of the male and female urinary-tract system and the male reproductive organs.

Organs under the domain of urology include the kidneys , adrenal glands , ureters , urinary bladder , urethra , and the male reproductive organs ( testes , epididymis , vas deferens , seminal vesicles , prostate , and penis ).

Uterus – The uterus or womb is a major female hormone-responsive secondary sex organ of the reproductive system in humans and most other mammals.

In the human, the lower end of the uterus, the cervix , opens into the vagina , while the upper end, the fundus, is connected to the fallopian tubes.

It is within the uterus that the fetus develops during gestation.

In the human embryo , the uterus develops from the paramesonephric ducts which fuse into the single organ known as a simplex uterus.

The uterus has different forms in many other animals and in some it exists as two separate uteri known as a duplex uterus.

V [ edit ] Vaccine – is a biological preparation that provides active acquired immunity to a particular disease.

A vaccine typically contains an agent that resembles a disease-causing microorganism and is often made from weakened or killed forms of the microbe, its toxins, or one of its surface proteins.

The agent stimulates the body's immune system to recognize the agent as a threat, destroy it, and to further recognize and destroy any of the microorganisms associated with that agent that it may encounter in the future.

Vaccines can be prophylactic (to prevent or ameliorate the effects of a future infection by a natural or "wild" pathogen ), or therapeutic (e.

g.

, vaccines against cancer , which are being investigated).

[316] [317] [318] [319] Vagina – In mammals , the vagina is the elastic, muscular part of the female genital tract.

In humans, it extends from the vulva to the cervix.

The outer vaginal opening is normally partly covered by a membrane called the hymen.

At the deep end, the cervix (neck of the uterus ) bulges into the vagina.

The vagina allows for sexual intercourse and birth.

It also channels menstrual flow (menses), which occurs in humans and closely related primates as part of the monthly menstrual cycle.

Vas deferens – also called ductus deferens, is part of the male reproductive system of many vertebrates ; these ducts transport sperm from the epididymis to the ejaculatory ducts in anticipation of ejaculation.

It is a partially coiled tube which exits the abdominal cavity through the inguinal canal.

Vastus intermedius muscle – arises from the front and lateral surfaces of the body of the femur in its upper two-thirds, sitting under the rectus femoris muscle and from the lower part of the lateral intermuscular septum.

Its fibers end in a superficial aponeurosis, which forms the deep part of the quadriceps femoris tendon.

Vastus lateralis muscle – Vastus medialis – Vein – Vena cava, inferior – Vena cava, superior – Ventricle – Ventricle system – Venule – Vertebral column – Virology – is the study of viral – submicroscopic, parasitic particles of genetic material contained in a protein coat [320] [321] – and virus-like agents.

It focuses on the following aspects of viruses: their structure, classification and evolution, their ways to infect and exploit host cells for reproduction, their interaction with host organism physiology and immunity, the diseases they cause, the techniques to isolate and culture them, and their use in research and therapy.

Virology is considered to be a subfield of microbiology or of medicine.

Visual acuity – (VA), commonly refers to the clarity of vision , but technically rates an examinee's ability to recognize small details with precision.

Visual acuity is dependent on optical and neural factors, i.

e.

, (1) the sharpness of the retinal image within the eye , (2) the health and functioning of the retina , and (3) the sensitivity of the interpretative faculty of the brain.

[322] Visual cortex – The visual cortex of the brain is the area of the cerebral cortex that processes visual information.

It is located in the occipital lobe.

Sensory input originating from the eyes travels through the lateral geniculate nucleus in the thalamus and then reaches the visual cortex.

The area of the visual cortex that receives the sensory input from the lateral geniculate nucleus is the primary visual cortex, also known as visual area 1 (V1), Brodmann area 17, or the striate cortex.

The extrastriate areas consist of visual areas 2, 3, 4, and 5 (also known as V2, V3, V4, and V5, or Brodmann area 18 and all Brodmann area 19 ).

[323] Visual field test – is an eye examination that can detect dysfunction in central and peripheral vision which may be caused by various medical conditions such as glaucoma , stroke , pituitary disease , brain tumours or other neurological deficits.

Visual field testing can be performed clinically by keeping the subject's gaze fixed while presenting objects at various places within their visual field.

Simple manual equipment can be used such as in the tangent screen test or the Amsler grid.

When dedicated machinery is used it is called a perimeter.

Visual perception – is the ability to interpret the surrounding environment using light in the visible spectrum reflected by the objects in the environment.

This is different from visual acuity , which refers to how clearly a person sees (for example "20/20 vision").

A person can have problems with visual perceptual processing even if they have 20/20 vision.

Vital signs – (also known as vitals ) are a group of the four to six most important medical signs that indicate the status of the body's vital (life-sustaining) functions.

These measurements are taken to help assess the general physical health of a person, give clues to possible diseases, and show progress toward recovery.

[324] [325] The normal ranges for a person's vital signs vary with age, weight, gender, and overall health.

[326] There are four primary vital signs : body temperature , blood pressure , pulse ( heart rate ), and breathing rate ( respiratory rate ), often notated as BT, BP, HR, and RR.

However, depending on the clinical setting, the vital signs may include other measurements called the "fifth vital sign" or "sixth vital sign".

Vital signs are recorded using the LOINC internationally accepted standard coding system.

[327] [328] Vitamin D – is a group of fat-soluble secosteroids responsible for increasing intestinal absorption of calcium , magnesium , and phosphate , and many other biological effects.

[329] [330] In humans, the most important compounds in this group are vitamin D 3 (also known as cholecalciferol ) and vitamin D 2 ( ergocalciferol ).

[329] [330] [331] Vitrectomy – is a surgery to remove some or all of the vitreous humor from the eye.

Anterior vitrectomy entails removing small portions of the vitreous humor from the front structures of the eye—often because these are tangled in an intraocular lens or other structures.

Pars plana vitrectomy is a general term for a group of operations accomplished in the deeper part of the eye, all of which involve removing some or all of the vitreous humor—the eye's clear internal jelly.

Vitreous body – Vulva – W [ edit ] Waist – is the part of the abdomen between the rib cage and hips.

On people with slim bodies, the waist is the narrowest part of the torso.

The waistline refers to the horizontal line where the waist is narrowest, or to the general appearance of the waist.

Wart – Warts are typically small, rough, hard growths that are similar in color to the rest of the skin.

They typically do not result in other symptoms, except when on the bottom of the feet, where they may be painful.

While they usually occur on the hands and feet, they can also affect other locations.

[332] One or many warts may appear.

They are not cancerous.

[333] Weber test – is a screening test for hearing performed with a tuning fork.

[334] [335] It can detect unilateral (one-sided) conductive hearing loss (middle ear hearing loss) and unilateral sensorineural hearing loss (inner ear hearing loss).

The test is named after Ernst Heinrich Weber (1795–1878).

Conductive hearing ability is mediated by the middle ear composed of the ossicles: the malleus , the incus , and the stapes.

Sensorineural hearing ability is mediated by the inner ear composed of the cochlea with its internal basilar membrane and attached cochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII).

The outer ear consisting of the pinna, ear canal, and ear drum or tympanic membrane transmits sounds to the middle ear but does not contribute to the conduction or sensorineural hearing ability save for hearing transmissions limited by cerumen impaction (wax collection in the ear canal).

The Weber test has had its value as a screening test questioned in the literature.

[336] [337] Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome – (WKS) is the combined presence of Wernicke encephalopathy (WE) and alcoholic Korsakoff syndrome.

Due to the close relationship between these two disorders, people with either are usually diagnosed with WKS as a single syndrome.

It mainly causes vision changes, ataxia and impaired memory.

[338] Wernicke's area – also called Wernicke's speech area, is one of the two parts of the cerebral cortex that are linked to speech, the other being Broca's area.

It is involved in the comprehension of written and spoken language, in contrast to Broca's area, which is involved in the production of language.

It is traditionally thought to reside in Brodmann area 22 , which is located in the superior temporal gyrus in the dominant cerebral hemisphere, which is the left hemisphere in about 95% of right-handed individuals and 60% of left-handed individuals.

Whiplash – is a non-medical term describing a range of injuries to the neck caused by or related to a sudden distortion of the neck [339] associated with extension , [340] although the exact injury mechanisms remain unknown.

The term "whiplash" is a colloquialism.

"Cervical acceleration–deceleration" (CAD) describes the mechanism of the injury, while the term "whiplash associated disorders" (WAD) describes the injury sequelae and symptoms.

White blood cell – White blood cells (WBCs), also called leukocytes or leucocytes, are the cells of the immune system that are involved in protecting the body against both infectious disease and foreign invaders.

All white blood cells are produced and derived from multipotent cells in the bone marrow known as hematopoietic stem cells.

Leukocytes are found throughout the body, including the blood and lymphatic system.

[341] White matter – refers to areas of the central nervous system (CNS) that are mainly made up of myelinated axons , also called tracts.

[342] Long thought to be passive tissue, white matter affects learning and brain functions, modulating the distribution of action potentials , acting as a relay and coordinating communication between different brain regions.

[343] Working memory – is a cognitive system with a limited capacity that can hold information temporarily.

[344] Working memory is important for reasoning and the guidance of decision-making and behavior.

[345] [346] Working memory is often used synonymously with short-term memory , but some theorists consider the two forms of memory distinct, assuming that working memory allows for the manipulation of stored information, whereas short-term memory only refers to the short-term storage of information.

[345] [347] Working memory is a theoretical concept central to cognitive psychology , neuropsychology, and neuroscience.

Wrist – In human anatomy , the wrist is variously defined as 1) the carpus or carpal bones, the complex of eight bones forming the proximal skeletal segment of the hand ; [348] [349] (2) the wrist joint or radiocarpal joint, the joint between the radius and the carpus [349] and; (3) the anatomical region surrounding the carpus including the distal parts of the bones of the forearm and the proximal parts of the metacarpus or five metacarpal bones and the series of joints between these bones, thus referred to as wrist joints.

[350] [351] This region also includes the carpal tunnel , the anatomical snuff box , bracelet lines, the flexor retinaculum , and the extensor retinaculum.

As a consequence of these various definitions, fractures to the carpal bones are referred to as carpal fractures, while fractures such as distal radius fracture are often considered fractures to the wrist.

X [ edit ] Xanthoma – A xanthoma (pl.

xanthomas or xanthomata) (condition: xanthomatosis), from Greek ξανθός (xanthós) 'yellow', is a deposition of yellowish cholesterol -rich material that can appear anywhere in the body in various disease states.

[352] They are cutaneous manifestations of lipidosis in which lipids accumulate in large foam cells within the skin.

[352] They are associated with hyperlipidemias , both primary and secondary types.

Y [ edit ] Yaws – is a tropical infection of the skin , bones and joints caused by the spirochete bacterium Treponema pallidum pertenue.

[353] [354] The disease begins with a round, hard swelling of the skin, 2 to 5 centimeters in diameter.

[353] The center may break open and form an ulcer.

[353] This initial skin lesion typically heals after three to six months.

[355] After weeks to years, joints and bones may become painful, fatigue may develop, and new skin lesions may appear.

[353] The skin of the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet may become thick and break open.

[355] The bones (especially those of the nose) may become misshapen.

[355] After five years or more large areas of skin may die, leaving a scar.

[353] Yellow fever – is a viral disease of typically short duration.

[356] In most cases, symptoms include fever , chills , loss of appetite , nausea , muscle pains particularly in the back, and headaches.

[356] Symptoms typically improve within five days.

[356] In about 15% of people, within a day of improving the fever comes back, abdominal pain occurs, and liver damage begins causing yellow skin.

[356] [357] If this occurs, the risk of bleeding and kidney problems is increased.

[356] Z [ edit ] Zellweger spectrum disorders – are a group of rare disorders that create the same disease process.

[358] The subdivisions of this spectrum are hyperpipecolic acidemia , Infantile Refsum disease , neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD), and Zellweger syndrome.

It can also be referred to as Peroxisomal Biogenesis Disorders, Zellweger Syndrome Spectrum, NALD, Cerebrohepatorenal Syndrome, and ZSS.

[359] It can affect many body organs, including the kidneys , eyes, and hearing.

[360] It is named after Hans Zellweger.

Zika virus – (ZIKV) (pronounced / ˈ z iː k ə / or / ˈ z ɪ k ə / [361] [362] ) is a member of the virus family Flaviviridae.

[363] It is spread by daytime-active Aedes mosquitoes, such as A.

aegypti and A.

albopictus.

[363] Its name comes from the Ziika Forest of Uganda, where the virus was first isolated in 1947.

[364] Zika virus shares a genus with the dengue , yellow fever , Japanese encephalitis , and West Nile viruses.

[364] Since the 1950s, it has been known to occur within a narrow equatorial belt from Africa to Asia.

From 2007 to 2016 [update] , the virus spread eastward, across the Pacific Ocean to the Americas, leading to the 2015–2016 Zika virus epidemic.

[365] Zoonosis – A zoonosis (plural zoonoses, or zoonotic diseases) is an infectious disease caused by a pathogen (an infectious agent, such as a bacterium , virus , parasite or prion ) that has jumped from a non-human animal (usually a vertebrate ) to a human.

[366] [367] [368] Typically, the first infected human transmits the infectious agent to at least one other human, who, in turn, infects others.

Zygomatic bone – In the human skull , the zygomatic bone (cheekbone or malar bone) is a paired irregular bone which articulates with the maxilla , the temporal bone , the sphenoid bone and the frontal bone.

It is situated at the upper and lateral part of the face and forms the prominence of the cheek , part of the lateral wall and floor of the orbit , and parts of the temporal fossa and the infratemporal fossa.

It presents a malar and a temporal surface; four processes (the frontosphenoidal, orbital, maxillary, and temporal), and four borders.

Zonular dialysis – Deficient support of the lenticular capsule of the eye by the Zonules of Zinn.

[369] Contents: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z See also References See also [ edit ] List of medical roots, suffixes and prefixes List of bones of the human skeleton List of nerves of the human body List of skeletal muscles of the human body Anatomical terms of location Anatomical terminology List of diseases Medical College Admission Test References [ edit ] ^ "Aarskog-Scott syndrome".

Genetics Home Reference.

Retrieved 2018-03-06.

^ Singer, Adam J.

; Talan, David A.

(Mar 13, 2014).

"Management of skin abscesses in the era of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus " (PDF).

The New England Journal of Medicine.

370 (11): 1039–47.

doi : 10.

1056/NEJMra1212788.

PMID 24620867.

Archived from the original (PDF) on October 30, 2014.

Retrieved June 4, 2018.

^ Field RE, Rajakulendran K (2011).

"The labro-acetabular complex".

J Bone Joint Surg Am.

94 (Suppl 2): 22–27.

doi : 10.

2106/JBJS.

J.

01710.

PMID 21543684.

^ Griffiths EJ, Khanduja V (2012).

"Hip arthroscopy: evolution, current practice and future developments".

Int Orthop.

36 (6): 1115–1121.

doi : 10.

1007/s00264-011-1459-4.

PMC 3353094.

PMID 22371112.

^ Aslam, I; Fleischer, A; Feldman, S (March 2015).

"Emerging drugs for the treatment of acne".

Expert Opinion on Emerging Drugs (Review).

20 (1): 91–101.

doi : 10.

1517/14728214.

2015.

990373.

PMID 25474485.

S2CID 12685388.

(subscription required) ^ Berman, Brian; Langevin, Helene; Witt, Claudia; Dubner, Ronald (29 July 2010).

"Acupuncture for Chronic Low Back Pain".

New England Journal of Medicine.

363 (5): 454–461.

doi : 10.

1056/NEJMct0806114.

PMID 20818865.

S2CID 10129706.

^ Adams, D; Cheng, F; Jou, H; Aung, S; Yasui, Y; Vohra, S (Dec 2011).

"The safety of pediatric acupuncture: a systematic review".

Pediatrics.

128 (6): e1575–e1587.

doi : 10.

1542/peds.

2011-1091.

PMID 22106073.

S2CID 46502395.

^ Santulli G.

MD (2015).

Adrenal Glands: From Pathophysiology to Clinical Evidence.

Nova Science Publishers, New York, NY.

ISBN 978-1-63483-570-1.

^ "Adrenal gland".

Medline Plus/Merriam-Webster Dictionary.

Retrieved 11 February 2015.

^ McConnell, Thomas H.

(2007).

The Nature of Disease: Pathology for the Health Professions.

Baltimore, Mar.

: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

p.

159.

ISBN 978-0-7817-5317-3.

Archived from the original on 8 September 2017.

^ "Types of Allergic Diseases".

NIAID.

May 29, 2015.

Archived from the original on 17 June 2015.

Retrieved 17 June 2015.

^ "Environmental Allergies: Symptoms".

NIAID.

April 22, 2015.

Archived from the original on 18 June 2015.

Retrieved 19 June 2015.

^ National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (July 2012).

"Food Allergy An Overview" (PDF).

Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2016.

^ Bahna SL (December 2002).

"Cow's milk allergy versus cow milk intolerance".

Annals of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology.

89 (6 Suppl 1): 56–60.

doi : 10.

1016/S1081-1206(10)62124-2.

PMID 12487206.

^ a b c Burns A, Iliffe S (February 2009).

"Alzheimer's disease".

BMJ.

338 : b158.

doi : 10.

1136/bmj.

b158.

PMID 19196745.

S2CID 8570146.

^ a b "Dementia Fact sheet".

World Health Organization.

12 December 2017.

^ Anal+Canal at the U.

S.

National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) ^ "anal canal" at Dorland's Medical Dictionary ^ Merriam Webster Dictionary ^ "What is Anesthesiology".

Archived from the original on 21 December 2016.

Retrieved 5 December 2016.

^ a b Moore, Keith L.

; Dalley, Arthur F.

; Agur, A.

M.

R.

(2013).

"Lower Limb".

Clinically Oriented Anatomy (7th ed.

).

Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

pp.

508–669.

ISBN 978-1-4511-1945-9.

^ WebMD (2009).

"ankle".

Webster's New World Medical Dictionary (3rd ed.

).

Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

p.

22.

ISBN 978-0-544-18897-6.

^ Milner, Brent K.

(1999).

"Musculoskeletal Imaging".

In Gay, Spencer B.

; Woodcock, Richard J.

(eds.

).

Radiology Recall.

Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

pp.

258–383.

ISBN 978-0-683-30663-7.

^ Williams, D.

S.

Blaise; Taunton, Jack (2007).

"Foot, ankle and lower leg".

In Kolt, Gregory S.

; Snyder-Mackler, Lynn (eds.

).

Physical Therapies in Sport and Exercise.

Elsevier Health Sciences.

pp.

420–39.

ISBN 978-0-443-10351-3.

^ del Castillo, Jorge (2012).

"Foot and Ankle Injuries".

In Adams, James G.

(ed.

).

Emergency Medicine.

Elsevier Health Sciences.

pp.

745–55.

ISBN 978-1-4557-3394-1.

^ Gray, Henry (1918).

"Talocrural Articulation or Ankle-joint".

Anatomy of the Human Body.

^ "Antibiotics".

NHS.

5 June 2014.

Retrieved 17 January 2015.

^ "Factsheet for experts".

European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2014.

Retrieved 21 December 2014.

^ Rhoades RA, Pflanzer RG (2002).

Human Physiology (4th ed.

).

Thomson Learning.

p.

584.

ISBN 978-0-534-42174-8.

^ Maton, Anthea; Jean Hopkins; Charles William McLaughlin; Susan Johnson; Maryanna Quon Warner; David LaHart; Jill D.

Wright (1995).

Human Biology Health.

Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-981176-0.

^ Kooij IA, Sahami S, Meijer SL, Buskens CJ, Te Velde AA (October 2016).

"The immunology of the vermiform appendix: a review of the literature".

Clinical and Experimental Immunology.

186 (1): 1–9.

doi : 10.

1111/cei.

12821.

PMC 5011360.

PMID 27271818.

^ "brachium – free dictionary".

Retrieved December 2, 2013.

^ "Dictionary.

com".

Retrieved December 2, 2013.

^ Encyclopaedia britannica 2013.

^ Maton, Anthea; Jean Hopkins; Charles William McLaughlin; Susan Johnson; Maryanna Quon Warner; David LaHart; Jill D.

Wright (1993).

Human Biology and Health.

Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-981176-0.

^ a b c "Arthritis and Rheumatic Diseases".

NIAMS.

October 2014.

Archived from the original on 4 October 2016.

Retrieved 14 September 2016.

^ "Arthritis Types".

CDC.

June 22, 2016.

Archived from the original on 14 September 2016.

Retrieved 14 September 2016.

^ "Autism Spectrum Disorder".

National Institute of Mental Health.

September 2015.

Archived from the original on 12 March 2016.

Retrieved 12 March 2016.

^ "F84.

5 Asperger syndrome".

World Health Organization.

2015.

Archived from the original on 2 November 2015.

Retrieved 13 March 2016.

^ McPartland J, Klin A (October 2006).

"Asperger's syndrome".

Adolescent Medicine Clinics.

17 (3): 771–88, abstract xiii.

doi : 10.

1016/j.

admecli.

2006.

06.

010 (inactive 31 January 2024).

PMID 17030291.

{{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of January 2024 ( link ) ^ Baskin JH, Sperber M, Price BH (2006).

"Asperger syndrome revisited".

Reviews in Neurological Diseases.

3 (1): 1–7.

PMID 16596080.

^ "Asthma Fact sheet №307".

WHO.

November 2013.

Archived from the original on June 29, 2011.

Retrieved 3 March 2016.

^ NHLBI Guideline 2007 , pp.

11–12 ^ British Guideline 2009 , p.

4 ^ "Heart Disease Other Related Conditions".

cdc.

gov.

3 September 2014.

Archived from the original on 14 February 2015.

Retrieved 19 February 2015.

^ Zoni-Berisso, M; Lercari, F; Carazza, T; Domenicucci, S (2014).

"Epidemiology of atrial fibrillation: European perspective".

Clinical Epidemiology.

6 : 213–20.

doi : 10.

2147/CLEP.

S47385.

PMC 4064952.

PMID 24966695.

^ Munger, TM; Wu, LQ; Shen, WK (January 2014).

"Atrial fibrillation".

Journal of Biomedical Research.

28 (1): 1–17.

doi : 10.

7555/JBR.

28.

20130191.

PMC 3904170.

PMID 24474959.

^ Sroubek A, Kelly M, Li X (February 2013).

"Inattentiveness in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder".

Neuroscience Bulletin.

29 (1): 103–10.

doi : 10.

1007/s12264-012-1295-6.

PMC 4440572.

PMID 23299717.

^ Caroline SC, ed.

(2010).

Encyclopedia of Cross-Cultural School Psychology.

Springer Science & Business Media.

p.

133.

ISBN 9780387717982.

^ "Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder".

National Institute of Mental Health.

March 2016.

Archived from the original on 23 July 2016.

Retrieved 5 March 2016 ^ a b c American Psychiatric Association, ed.

(2013).

"Autism Spectrum Disorder, 299.

00 (F84.

0)".

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fifth ed.

).

American Psychiatric Publishing.

pp.

50–59.

^ Landa RJ (2008).

"Diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders in the first 3 years of life".

Nat Clin Pract Neurol.

4 (3): 138–47.

doi : 10.

1038/ncpneuro0731.

PMID 18253102.

^ Stefanatos GA (2008).

"Regression in autistic spectrum disorders".

Neuropsychol Rev.

18 (4): 305–19.

doi : 10.

1007/s11065-008-9073-y.

PMID 18956241.

S2CID 34658024.

^ a b " Paresthesia Definition and Origin".

dictionary.

com.

Retrieved 1 August 2015.

^ Church E, Odle T.

Diagnosis and treatment of back pain.

Radiologic Technology [serial online].

November 2007;79(2):126-204.

Available from: CINAHL Plus with Full Text, Ipswich, MA.

Accessed December 12, 2017.

^ Dolenšek J, Rupnik MS, Stožer A (2015-01-02).

"Structural similarities and differences between the human and the mouse pancreas".

Islets.

7 (1): e1024405.

doi : 10.

1080/19382014.

2015.

1024405.

PMC 4589993.

PMID 26030186.

^ Chen C, Cohrs CM, Stertmann J, Bozsak R, Speier S (September 2017).

"Human beta cell mass and function in diabetes: Recent advances in knowledge and technologies to understand disease pathogenesis".

Molecular Metabolism.

6 (9): 943–957.

doi : 10.

1016/j.

molmet.

2017.

06.

019.

PMC 5605733.

PMID 28951820.

^ a b Lippert LS (2006).

Clinical kinesiology and anatomy (4th ed.

).

Philadelphia: F.

A.

Davis Company.

pp.

126 –7.

ISBN 978-0-8036-1243-3.

^ Eating disorders: core interventions in the treatment and management of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and related eating disorders; National Clinical Practice Guideline No.

CG9.

Leicester [u.

a.

]: The British Psychological Society and Gaskell.

2004.

ISBN 978-1854333988.

^ Wu, M; et al.

(2014).

"Set-shifting ability across the Spectrum of Eating Disorders and in overweight and obesity: a systematic review and meta-analysis".

Psychological Medicine.

44 (16): 3365–85.

doi : 10.

1017/S0033291714000294.

PMID 25066267.

S2CID 27815868.

^ Hay, PP; Bacaltchuk, J; Stefano, S; Kashyap, P (7 October 2009).

"Psychological treatments for bulimia nervosa and binging".

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.

2009 (4): CD000562.

doi : 10.

1002/14651858.

CD000562.

pub3.

PMC 7034415.

PMID 19821271.

^ Abramovitz, Melissa (2014).

Amazing Feats of Biological Engineering.

Essential Library.

ISBN 978-1-306-96705-1.

OCLC 884551700.

^ Herold, Keith; Bentley, William E.

; Vossoughi, Jafar (2010).

The Basics of Bioengineering Education.

College Park, Maryland.

p.

65.

ISBN 9783642149979.

{{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Based on definition from: "Aquarena Wetlands Project glossary of terms".

Texas State University at San Marcos.

Archived from the original on 2004-06-08.

^ "Biochemistry".

acs.

org.

^ Abhaya Indrayan (2012).

Medical Biostatistics.

CRC Press.

ISBN 978-1-4398-8414-0.

^ Anderson, IM; Haddad, PM; Scott, J (2012).

"Bipolar disorder".

BMJ.

345 : e8508.

doi : 10.

1136/bmj.

e8508.

PMID 23271744.

S2CID 22156246.

^ American Psychiatry Association (2013).

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.

).

Arlington: American Psychiatric Publishing.

pp.

123–154.

ISBN 0-89042-555-8 ^ "DSM IV Criteria for Manic Episode".

Food and Drug Administration.

Archived from the original on July 31, 2017.

^ "Definition of Birth control".

MedicineNet.

Archived from the original on August 6, 2012.

Retrieved August 9, 2012.

^ a b "Bladder Cancer Treatment".

National Cancer Institute.

1 January 1980.

Archived from the original on 14 July 2017.

Retrieved 18 July 2017.

^ "Cancer Fact sheet N°297".

World Health Organization.

February 2014.

Archived from the original on 29 December 2010.

Retrieved 10 June 2014.

^ "Defining Cancer".

National Cancer Institute.

17 September 2007.

Archived from the original on 25 June 2014.

Retrieved 10 June 2014.

^ "Blood Vessels – Heart and Blood Vessel Disorders – Merck Manuals Consumer Version".

Merck Manuals Consumer Version.

Retrieved 2016-12-22.

^ C.

, Farhi, Diane (2009).

Pathology of bone marrow and blood cells (2nd ed.

).

Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott William & Wilkins.

ISBN 9780781770934.

OCLC 191807944.

{{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Arikan, Hüseyin; Çiçek, Kerim (2014).

"Haematology of amphibians and reptiles: a review" (PDF).

North-Western Journal of Zoology.

10 : 190–209.

^ Katherine, Abel (2013).

Official CPC Certification Study Guide.

American Medical Association.

^ Vunjak-Novakovic, G.

; Tandon, N.

; Godier, A.

; Maidhof, R.

; Marsano, A.

; Martens, T.

P.

; Radisic, M.

(2010).

"Challenges in Cardiac Tissue Engineering".

Tissue Engineering Part B: Reviews.

16 (2): 169–187.

doi : 10.

1089/ten.

teb.

2009.

0352.

PMC 2946883.

PMID 19698068.

^ "Types of Arrhythmia".

July 1, 2011.

Retrieved 19 March 2015.

^ a b "General Information About Adult Brain Tumors".

NCI.

14 April 2014.

Archived from the original on 5 July 2014.

Retrieved 8 June 2014.

^ Tse, Victor (10 November 2009).

"Brain Metastasis".

Medscape.

Retrieved 13 January 2010.

^ "Metastatic Brain Tumors" (PDF).

Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 August 2017.

Retrieved 13 August 2017.

^ "Breast – Definition of breast by Merriam-Webster".

merriam-webster.

com.

Retrieved 21 October 2015.

^ "Breast Cancer".

NCI.

January 1980.

Archived from the original on 25 June 2014.

Retrieved 29 June 2014.

^ a b c d "Breast Cancer Treatment (PDQ®)".

NCI.

23 May 2014.

Archived from the original on 5 July 2014.

Retrieved 29 June 2014.

^ Saunders, Christobel; Jassal, Sunil (2009).

Breast cancer (1.

ed.

).

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

p.

Chapter 13.

ISBN 978-0-19-955869-8.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2015.

^ Cantalupo C, Hopkins WD (November 2001).

"Asymmetric Broca's area in great apes".

Nature.

414 (6863): 505.

Bibcode : 2001Natur.

414.

505C.

doi : 10.

1038/35107134.

PMC 2043144.

PMID 11734839.

^ Netter, Frank H.

(2014).

Atlas of Human Anatomy Including Student Consult Interactive Ancillaries and Guides (6th ed.

).

Philadelphia, Penn.

: W B Saunders Co.

p.

200.

ISBN 978-1-4557-0418-7.

^ Maton, Anthea; Jean Hopkins; Charles William McLaughlin; Susan Johnson; Maryanna Quon Warner; David LaHart; Jill D.

Wright (1993).

Human Biology and Health.

wood Cliffs, New Jersey, USA: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-981176-0.

[ page needed ] ^ "bruit" at Dorland's Medical Dictionary ^ "vascular murmur" at Dorland's Medical Dictionary ^ a b c "Bulimia nervosa fact sheet".

Office on Women's Health.

July 16, 2012.

Archived from the original on 19 June 2015.

Retrieved 27 June 2015.

^ Brini, Marisa; Ottolini, Denis; Calì, Tito; Carafoli, Ernesto (2013).

"Chapter 4.

Calcium in Health and Disease".

In Astrid Sigel, Helmut Sigel and Roland K.

O.

Sigel.

Interrelations between Essential Metal Ions and Human Diseases.

Metal Ions in Life Sciences.

13.

Springer.

pp.

81–137.

doi:10.

1007/978-94-007-7500-8_4.

ISBN 978-94-007-7499-5.

PMID 24470090.

^ Brini, Marisa; Call, Tito; Ottolini, Denis; Carafoli, Ernesto (2013).

"Chapter 5 Intracellular Calcium Homeostasis and Signaling".

In Banci, Lucia (Ed.

).

Metallomics and the Cell.

Metal Ions in Life Sciences.

12.

Springer.

pp.

119–68.

doi:10.

1007/978-94-007-5561-1_5.

ISBN 978-94-007-5560-4.

PMID 23595672.

electronic-book ISBN 978-94-007-5561-1 ISSN 1559-0836 electronic-ISSN 1868-0402 ^ "Cancer".

World Health Organization.

12 September 2018.

Retrieved 19 December 2018.

^ a b "Defining Cancer".

National Cancer Institute.

17 September 2007.

Retrieved 28 March 2018.

^ a b "What Is Sudden Cardiac Arrest?".

NHLBI.

June 22, 2016.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2016.

Retrieved 16 August 2016.

^ Field, John M.

(2009).

The Textbook of Emergency Cardiovascular Care and CPR.

Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

p.

11.

ISBN 9780781788991.

Archived from the original on 2017-09-05.

^ a b "What Are the Signs and Symptoms of Sudden Cardiac Arrest?".

NHLBI.

June 22, 2016.

Archived from the original on 27 August 2016.

Retrieved 16 August 2016.

^ a b c Shanthi Mendis; Pekka Puska; Bo Norrving; World Health Organization (2011).

Global Atlas on Cardiovascular Disease Prevention and Control (PDF).

World Health Organization in collaboration with the World Heart Federation and the World Stroke Organization.

pp.

3–18.

ISBN 978-92-4-156437-3.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2014-08-17.

^ GBD 2013 Mortality and Causes of Death Collaborators (17 December 2014).

"Global, regional, and national age-sex specific all-cause and cause-specific mortality for 240 causes of death, 1990-2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013".

Lancet.

385 (9963): 117–71.

doi : 10.

1016/S0140-6736(14)61682-2.

PMC 4340604.

PMID 25530442.

^ a b OED 2nd edition, 1989.

^ a b Entry "carotid" in Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary.

^ a b Ashrafian H (March 2007).

"Anatomically specific clinical examination of the carotid arterial tree".

Anatomical Science International.

82 (1): 16–23.

doi : 10.

1111/j.

1447-073X.

2006.

00152.

x.

PMID 17370446.

S2CID 12109379.

^ a b Manbachi A, Hoi Y, Wasserman BA, Lakatta EG, Steinman DA (December 2011).

"On the shape of the common carotid artery with implications for blood velocity profiles".

Physiological Measurement.

32 (12): 1885–97.

doi : 10.

1088/0967-3334/32/12/001.

PMC 3494738.

PMID 22031538.

^ a b "Carotid artery".

WebMD.

Retrieved 28 July 2015.

^ Kingston 2000, pp 126-127 ^ a b Burton, C; Chesterton, LS; Davenport, G (May 2014).

"Diagnosing and managing carpal tunnel syndrome in primary care".

The British Journal of General Practice.

64 (622): 262–3.

doi : 10.

3399/bjgp14x679903.

PMC 4001168.

PMID 24771836.

^ "Module - Introduction to Joints".

Archived from the original on 2008-01-17.

Retrieved 2008-01-29.

^ "Cell Biology | Learn Science at Scitable".

www.

nature.

com.

Retrieved 2018-06-10.

^ Hodos, William (2009), "Evolution of Cerebellum", Encyclopedia of Neuroscience , Springer, pp.

1240–1243, doi : 10.

1007/978-3-540-29678-2_3124 , ISBN 978-3-540-23735-8 ^ Wolf U, Rapoport MJ, Schweizer TA (2009).

"Evaluating the affective component of the cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome".

Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences.

21 (3): 245–53.

doi : 10.

1176/jnp.

2009.

21.

3.

245.

PMID 19776302.

^ a b Fine EJ, Ionita CC, Lohr L (December 2002).

"The history of the development of the cerebellar examination".

Seminars in Neurology.

22 (4): 375–84.

doi : 10.

1055/s-2002-36759.

PMID 12539058.

S2CID 260317107.

^ "Defining Cancer".

National Cancer Institute.

2007-09-17.

Archived from the original on 25 June 2014.

Retrieved 10 June 2014.

^ Tarney, CM; Han, J (2014).

"Postcoital bleeding: a review on etiology, diagnosis, and management".

Obstetrics and Gynecology International.

2014 : 192087.

doi : 10.

1155/2014/192087.

PMC 4086375.

PMID 25045355.

^ "Full Definition of chin".

Merriam-Webster Dictionary.

Retrieved 2015-09-22.

^ O'Loughlin, Michael McKinley, Valerie Dean (2006).

Human anatomy.

Boston: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.

pp.

400–01.

ISBN 0-07-249585-5.

{{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Guideline 53: Chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (or encephalopathy).

London: National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence.

2007.

ISBN 978-1-84629-453-2.

^ Evengård, B; Schacterle, RS; Komaroff, AL (1999).

"Chronic fatigue syndrome: new insights and old ignorance".

Journal of Internal Medicine.

246 (5): 455–69.

doi : 10.

1046/j.

1365-2796.

1999.

00513.

x.

PMID 10583715.

S2CID 34123925.

^ Kleinmann, G; Kim, H.

J.

; Yee, R.

W.

(2006).

"Scleral expansion procedure for the correction of presbyopia".

International Ophthalmology Clinics.

46 (3): 1–12.

doi : 10.

1097/00004397-200604630-00003.

PMID 16929221.

S2CID 45247729.

^ Schachar, Ronald A.

(2012).

"Anatomy and Physiology.

" (Chapter 4) The Mechanism of Accommodation and Presbyopia.

Kugler Publications.

ISBN 978-9-062-99233-1.

^ Land, Michael (Apr 19, 2015).

"Focusing by shape change in the lens of the eye: a commentary on Young (1801) 'On the mechanism of the eye' ".

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London.

Series B, Biological Sciences.

370 (1666).

School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences: 20140308.

doi : 10.

1098/rstb.

2014.

0308.

PMC 4360117.

PMID 25750232.

^ Schnaudigel OE.

Anatomie des Sulcus ciliaris [Anatomy of the ciliary sulcus].

Fortschr Ophthalmol.

1990;87(4):388-9.

German.

PMID 2210569.

^ Hyland, Scott; Varacallo, Matthew (8 Feb 2019).

"Anatomy, Shoulder and Upper Limb, Clavicle".

StatPearls.

StatPearls Publishing.

PMID 30252246.

Retrieved 16 June 2019.

^ "Celiac Disease".

NIDDKD.

June 2015.

Archivedfrom the original on 13 March 2016.

Retrieved 17 March 2016.

^ a b c d Fasano A (April 2005).

"Clinical presentation of celiac disease in the pediatric population".

Gastroenterology (Review).

128 (4 Suppl 1): S68–73.

doi : 10.

1053/j.

gastro.

2005.

02.

015.

PMID 15825129.

^ a b c Husby S, Koletzko S, Korponay-Szabó IR, Mearin ML, Phillips A, Shamir R, Troncone R, Giersiepen K, Branski D, Catassi C, Lelgeman M, Mäki M, Ribes-Koninckx C, Ventura A, Zimmer KP, ESPGHAN Working Group on Coeliac Disease Diagnosis; ESPGHAN Gastroenterology Committee; European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition (January 2012).

"European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition guidelines for the diagnosis of coeliac disease" (PDF).

J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (Practice Guideline).

54 (1): 136–60.

doi : 10.

1097/MPG.

0b013e31821a23d0.

PMID 22197856.

S2CID 15029283.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 April 2016.

Since 1990, the understanding of the pathological processes of CD has increased enormously, leading to a change in the clinical paradigm of CD from a chronic, gluten-dependent enteropathy of childhood to a systemic disease with chronic immune features affecting different organ systems.

(.

) atypical symptoms may be considerably more common than classic symptoms ^ Newnham, Evan D (2017).

"Coeliac disease in the 21st century: Paradigm shifts in the modern age".

Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology.

32 : 82–85.

doi : 10.

1111/jgh.

13704.

PMID 28244672.

S2CID 46285202.

Presentation of CD with malabsorptive symptoms or malnutrition is now the exception rather than the rule.

^ Rostami Nejad M, Hogg-Kollars S, Ishaq S, Rostami K (2011).

"Subclinical celiac disease and gluten sensitivity".

Gastroenterol Hepatol Bed Bench (Review).

4 (3): 102–8.

PMC 4017418.

PMID 24834166.

^ Tonutti E, Bizzaro N (2014).

"Diagnosis and classification of celiac disease and gluten sensitivity".

Autoimmun Rev (Review).

13 (4–5): 472–6.

doi : 10.

1016/j.

autrev.

2014.

01.

043.

PMID 24440147.

^ a b Ciccocioppo R, Kruzliak P, Cangemi GC, Pohanka M, Betti E, Lauret E, Rodrigo L (22 October 2015).

"The Spectrum of Differences between Childhood and Adulthood Celiac Disease".

Nutrients (Review).

7 (10): 8733–51.

doi : 10.

3390/nu7105426.

PMC 4632446.

PMID 26506381.

Several additional studies in extensive series of coeliac patients have clearly shown that TG2A sensitivity varies depending on the severity of duodenal damage, and reaches almost 100% in the presence of complete villous atrophy (more common in children under three years), 70% for subtotal atrophy, and up to 30% when only an increase in IELs is present.

(IELs: intraepithelial lymphocytes) ^ "Colon and Rectal Surgery Specialty Description".

American Medical Association.

Retrieved 22 May 2020.

^ Arroll, B (March 2011).

"Common cold".

Clinical Evidence.

2011 (3): 1510.

PMC 3275147.

PMID 21406124.

Common colds are defined as upper respiratory tract infections that affect the predominantly nasal part of the respiratory mucosa ^ a b Allan, GM; Arroll, B (18 February 2014).

"Prevention and treatment of the common cold: making sense of the evidence".

CMAJ: Canadian Medical Association Journal.

186 (3): 190–99.

doi : 10.

1503/cmaj.

121442.

PMC 3928210.

PMID 24468694.

^ a b c "Common Colds: Protect Yourself and Others".

CDC.

6 October 2015.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2016.

Retrieved 4 February 2016.

^ Eccles R (November 2005).

"Understanding the symptoms of the common cold and influenza".

Lancet Infect Dis.

5 (11): 718–25.

doi : 10.

1016/S1473-3099(05)70270-X.

PMC 7185637.

PMID 16253889.

^ Heikkinen T, Järvinen A (January 2003).

"The common cold".

Lancet.

361 (9351): 51–59.

doi : 10.

1016/S0140-6736(03)12162-9.

PMC 7112468.

PMID 12517470.

^ Henry Gray (1918), Anatomy of the Human Body , p.

677, archived from the original on 2009-12-22 , retrieved 2008-06-15 ^ "Coronary Arteries".

Texas Heart Institute.

Retrieved 2019-09-01.

^ Velut, S; Destrieux, C; Kakou, M (May 1998).

"[Morphologic anatomy of the corpus callosum]".

Neuro-Chirurgie.

44 (1 Suppl): 17–30.

PMID 9757322.

^ "Corpus callosum".

Queensland Brain Institute.

10 November 2017.

^ Luders, Eileen; Thompson, Paul M.

; Toga, Arthur W.

(18 August 2010).

"The Development of the Corpus Callosum in the Healthy Human Brain".

Journal of Neuroscience.

30 (33): 10985–10990.

doi : 10.

1523/JNEUROSCI.

5122-09.

2010.

PMC 3197828.

PMID 20720105.

^ Vilensky, Joel; Robertson, Wendy; Suarez-Quian, Carlos (2015).

The Clinical Anatomy of the Cranial Nerves: The Nerves of "On Olympus Towering Top".

Ames, Iowa: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-118-49201-7.

^ Standring, Susan; Borley, Neil R.

(2008).

"Overview of cranial nerves and cranial nerve nuclei".

Gray's anatomy: the anatomical basis of clinical practice (40th ed.

).

[Edinburgh]: Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier.

ISBN 978-0-443-06684-9.

^ Rieger, R.

; Michaelis, A.

; Green, M.

M.

(1968), A glossary of genetics and cytogenetics: Classical and molecular , New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 9780387076683 ^ This article incorporates text in the public domain from the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918) ^ Brown, JM; Wickham, JB; McAndrew, DJ; Huang, XF (2007).

"Muscles within muscles: Coordination of 19 muscle segments within three shoulder muscles during isometric motor tasks".

J Electromyogr Kinesiol.

17 (1): 57–73.

doi : 10.

1016/j.

jelekin.

2005.

10.

007.

PMID 16458022.

^ "Glossary of Dental Clinical and Administrative Terms".

American Dental Association.

Archived from the original on 6 March 2016.

Retrieved 1 February 2014.

^ a b c d Nedorost, Susan T.

(2012).

Generalized Dermatitis in Clinical Practice.

Springer Science & Business Media.

pp.

1–3, 9, 13–14.

ISBN 9781447128977.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2016.

Retrieved 29 July 2016.

^ "Handout on Health: Atopic Dermatitis (A type of eczema)".

NIAMS.

May 2013.

Archived from the original on 30 May 2015.

Retrieved 29 July 2016.

^ a b See List of medical abbreviations: D for variants.

^ "About diabetes".

World Health Organization.

Archived from the original on 31 March 2014.

Retrieved 4 April 2014.

^ a b c "Diabetes Fact sheet N°312".

WHO.

October 2013.

Archived from the original on 26 August 2013.

Retrieved 25 March 2014.

^ Kitabchi AE, Umpierrez GE, Miles JM, Fisher JN (July 2009).

"Hyperglycemic crises in adult patients with diabetes".

Diabetes Care.

32 (7): 1335–43.

doi : 10.

2337/dc09-9032.

PMC 2699725.

PMID 19564476.

^ "A Consumer's Guide to the DRIs (Dietary Reference Intakes)".

Health Canada.

2010-11-29.

Retrieved 2017-08-29.

^ "differential diagnosis".

Merriam-Webster (Medical dictionary).

Retrieved 30 December 2014.

^ "Ear".

Oxford Dictionary.

Archived from the original on July 18, 2012.

Retrieved 25 February 2016.

^ "MeSH Browser".

meshb.

nlm.

nih.

gov.

^ Palastanga & Soames 2012 , p.

138 ^ Kapandji 1982 , pp.

74–7 ^ "Embryology Definition".

7 October 2019.

^ Marieb E (2014).

Anatomy & physiology.

Glenview, IL: Pearson Education, Inc.

ISBN 978-0321861580.

^ Nelson, R.

J.

2005.

An Introduction to Behavioral Endocrinology, Fourth Edition.

Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA.

^ "Introduction to Behavioral Endocrinology".

idea.

ucr.

edu.

Archived from the original on 2018-05-18.

Retrieved 2020-02-06.

^ "Behavioral Endocrinology".

www-rci.

rutgers.

edu.

Archived from the original on 2016-11-04.

Retrieved 2014-03-06.

^ Miquel Porta (2014).

A Dictionary of Epidemiology (6th ed.

).

New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-997673-7.

Retrieved 16 July 2014.

^ a b Chang BS, Lowenstein DH (September 2003).

"Epilepsy".

The New England Journal of Medicine.

349 (13): 1257–66.

doi : 10.

1056/NEJMra022308.

PMID 14507951.

^ Fisher RS, Acevedo C, Arzimanoglou A, Bogacz A, Cross JH, Elger CE, Engel J, Forsgren L, French JA, Glynn M, Hesdorffer DC, Lee BI, Mathern GW, Moshé SL, Perucca E, Scheffer IE, Tomson T, Watanabe M, Wiebe S (April 2014).

"ILAE official report: a practical clinical definition of epilepsy" (PDF).

Epilepsia.

55 (4): 475–82.

doi : 10.

1111/epi.

12550.

PMID 24730690.

S2CID 35958237.

Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 June 2014.

^ a b "Epilepsy Fact sheet".

WHO.

February 2016.

Archivedfrom the original on 11 March 2016.

Retrieved 4 March 2016.

^ Fisher R, van Emde Boas W, Blume W, Elger C, Genton P, Lee P, Engel J (2005).

"Epileptic seizures and epilepsy: definitions proposed by the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) and the International Bureau for Epilepsy (IBE)".

Epilepsia.

46 (4): 470–2.

doi:10.

1111/j.

0013-9580.

2005.

66104.

x.

PMID 15816939.

^ Cunningham GR, Rosen RC.

Overview of male sexual dysfunction.

In: UpToDate, Martin KA (Ed), UpToDate, Waltham, MA, 2018.

^ Wood, J.

(1863-01-01).

On Some Varieties in Human Myology.

Royal Society of London.

^ Martínez, Daniel Casanova; Gandur, Iván Valdivia; Golanó, Pau (2012-12-20).

"Extensor pollicis et indicis communis or extensor indicis radialis muscle".

Anatomical Science International.

88 (3): 153–155.

doi : 10.

1007/s12565-012-0164-8.

ISSN 1447-6959.

PMID 23255266.

S2CID 8043419.

^ Zimmer, Carl (February 2012).

"Our Strange, Important, Subconscious Light Detectors".

Discover Magazine.

Retrieved 2012-05-05.

^ a b Moore, Keith L.

; Dalley, Arthur F.

; Agur, Anne M.

R.

(2010).

Moore's clinical anatomy.

United States of America: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

pp.

843–980.

ISBN 978-1-60547-652-0.

^ "Year of Discovery, Faceless and Brainless Fish".

2011-12-29.

Archived from the original on 2014-10-06.

Retrieved December 11, 2013.

^ Mahadevan, Harold Ellis, Vishy (2013).

Clinical anatomy applied anatomy for students and junior doctors (13th ed.

).

Chichester, West Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 9781118373767.

{{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Jonas Keiler; Marko Schulze; Host Claassen; Andreas Wree (2018).

"Femoral vein diameter, valve and tributary topography in humans - a post mortem analysis".

Clinical Anatomy.

31 (7): 1065–1076.

doi : 10.

1002/ca.

23224.

PMID 30240062.

S2CID 52308003.

^ a b Gray, Henry (2016).

Gray's anatomy: the anatomical basis of clinical practice.

Standring, Susan (41st ed.

).

[Philadelphia].

ISBN 978-0-7020-5230-9.

OCLC 920806541.

{{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "gamete | Definition, Formation, Examples, & Facts".

Encyclopedia Britannica.

Retrieved 2020-10-20.

^ "gamete / gametes | Learn Science at Scitable".

www.

nature.

com.

Retrieved 2020-10-20.

^ MeSH heading gastroenterology ^ Ermak G (2015).

Emerging Medical Technologies.

World Scientific.

ISBN 978-981-4675-81-9.

^ Kaji, Eugene H.

(2001-02-07).

"Gene and Stem Cell Therapies".

JAMA.

285 (5): 545–550.

doi : 10.

1001/jama.

285.

5.

545.

ISSN 0098-7484.

PMID 11176856.

^ Griffiths AJ, Miller JH, Suzuki DT, Lewontin RC, Gelbart, eds.

(2000).

"Genetics and the Organism: Introduction".

An Introduction to Genetic Analysis (7th ed.

).

New York: W.

H.

Freeman.

ISBN 978-0-7167-3520-5.

^ Hartl D, Jones E (2005) ^ "the definition of genetics".

www.

dictionary.

com.

Retrieved 2018-10-25.

^ "genitourinary system" at Dorland's Medical Dictionary ^ "UC Davis Department of Radiology - Genitourinary Radiology".

Retrieved 2010-03-16.

^ "Definition of Geriatric medicine".

MedicineNet.

Archived from the original on 2020-08-01.

Retrieved 2021-02-15.

^ Geriatrics separation from internal medicine Archived 14 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Geriatric Medicine Specialty Description".

American Medical Association.

Retrieved 5 September 2020.

^ "the definition of sex gland".

Dictionary.

com.

Archived from the original on 22 July 2015.

Retrieved 8 May 2018.

^ "gonad (noun) American English definition and synonyms - Macmillan Dictionary".

www.

macmillandictionary.

com.

Archived from the original on 8 May 2018.

Retrieved 8 May 2018.

^ Chen LX, Schumacher HR (October 2008).

"Gout: an evidence-based review".

J Clin Rheumatol.

14 (5 Suppl): S55–62.

doi : 10.

1097/RHU.

0b013e3181896921.

PMID 18830092.

S2CID 6644013.

^ Hui, M; Carr, A; Cameron, S; Davenport, G; Doherty, M; Forrester, H; Jenkins, W; Jordan, KM; Mallen, CD; McDonald, TM; Nuki, G; Pywell, A; Zhang, W; Roddy, E; British Society for Rheumatology Standards, Audit and Guidelines Working, Group.

(26 May 2017).

"The British Society for Rheumatology Guideline for the Management of Gout".

Rheumatology.

56 (7): e1–e20.

doi : 10.

1093/rheumatology/kex156.

PMID 28549177.

^ a b Richette, P; Bardin, T (2010).

"Gout".

Lancet.

375 (9711): 318–28.

doi : 10.

1016/S0140-6736(09)60883-7.

PMID 19692116.

S2CID 208793280.

^ Schlesinger N (March 2010).

"Diagnosing and treating gout: a review to aid primary care physicians".

Postgrad Med.

122 (2): 157–61.

doi : 10.

3810/pgm.

2010.

03.

2133.

PMID 20203467.

S2CID 35321485.

^ British Journal of Urology (1997), 80, 940–945 The guarding reflex revisited J.

M.

PARK, D.

A.

BLOOM and E.

J.

McGUIRE* Section of Urology, Department of Surgery, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, and *Department of Urology, University of Texas Medical School Houston, Texas, USA ^ R.

Porter (1991), reviews Ornella Moscucci, The science of women: gynaecology and gender in England, 1800-1929, Cambridge History of Medicine, Cambridge University Press, 1990, 8vo, pp.

x, 278 retrieved 2021-March-07 ^ a b Mark L.

Latash (18 March 2008).

Synergy.

Oxford University Press, USA.

pp.

137–.

ISBN 978-0-19-533316-9.

^ Tracy L.

Kivell; Pierre Lemelin; Brian G.

Richmond; Daniel Schmitt (10 August 2016).

The Evolution of the Primate Hand: Anatomical, Developmental, Functional, and Paleontological Evidence.

Springer.

pp.

7–.

ISBN 978-1-4939-3646-5.

^ Goldfinger, Eliot (1991).

Human Anatomy for Artists: The Elements of Form: The Elements of Form.

Oxford University Press.

pp.

177 , 295.

ISBN 978-0-19-505206-0.

^ O'Rahilly, Ronan; Müller, Fabiola (1983).

Basic Human Anatomy: A Regional Study of Human Structure.

Saunders.

p.

93.

^ Schmidt & Lanz 2003 , p.

105 ^ Marieb 2004 , p.

237 ^ a b Hand surgery is extremely difficult, ranking last on what most doctors would consider "easy.

" It can cause loss of memory, loss of fingers, loss of hand or hands, loss of leg and, in above average cases, death.

"About Hand Surgery" Archived 2014-04-13 at the Wayback Machine , American Society for Surgery of the Hand.

Retrieved on 2011-02-24.

^ "Why Visit a Hand Surgeon" Archived 2013-12-09 at the Wayback Machine , American Society for Surgery of the Hand.

Retrieved on 2011-02-24.

^ "Definition: cheiroplasty from Online Medical Dictionary".

Online Medical Dictionary.

Retrieved 2009-01-06.

^ "Definition of chiroplasty by the Free Online Dictionary, Thesaurus and Encyclopedia".

The Free Dictionary.

Retrieved 2009-01-06.

^ World Health Organization.

Constitution of the World Health Organization as adopted by the International Health Conference, New York, 19–22 June 1946; signed on 22 July 1946 by the representatives of 61 States (Official Records of the World Health Organization, no.

2, p.

100) and entered into force on 7 April 1948.

In Grad, Frank P.

(2002).

"The Preamble of the Constitution of the World Health Organization".

Bulletin of the World Health Organization.

80 (12): 982.

PMC 2567708.

PMID 12571728.

^ World Health Organization.

(2006).

Constitution of the World Health Organization – Basic Documents , Forty-fifth edition, Supplement, October 2006.

^ Jadad AR, O'Grady L: How should health be defined? (2008).

"How should health be defined?".

BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.

).

337 : a2900.

doi : 10.

1136/bmj.

a2900.

PMID 19073663.

S2CID 8842596.

^ Callahan D.

(1973).

"The WHO definition of 'health' ".

The Hastings Center Studies.

1 (3): 77–87.

doi : 10.

2307/3527467.

JSTOR 3527467.

PMID 4607284.

^ Taylor S, Marandi A (2008).

"How should health be defined?".

BMJ.

337 : a290.

doi : 10.

1136/bmj.

a290.

PMID 18614520.

S2CID 19081214.

^ Huber, Machteld; Knottnerus, J.

André; Green, Lawrence; Horst, Henriëtte van der; Jadad, Alejandro R.

; Kromhout, Daan; Leonard, Brian; Lorig, Kate; Loureiro, Maria Isabel (2011-07-26).

"How should we define health?".

BMJ.

343 : d4163.

doi : 10.

1136/bmj.

d4163.

hdl : 1885/17067.

ISSN 0959-8138.

PMID 21791490.

S2CID 19573798.

^ Tortora, Gerard J.

; Grabowski, Sandra R.

(2003).

Roesch, Bonnie (ed.

).

Principles of Anatomy and Physiology: Volume 4 Maintenance and Continuity of the Human Body (Textbook).

Vol.

4 (10th ed.

).

New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

p.

734.

ISBN 0-471-22934-2.

^ Jacobson, Elliott R.

(2007).

Infectious Diseases and Pathology of Reptiles.

CRC Press.

p.

7.

ISBN 978-0-8493-2321-8.

Retrieved 2009-01-09.

^ Fossen C.

"What is Biology?".

www.

ntnu.

edu.

Retrieved 2018-07-25.

^ Villani AC, Sarkizova S, Hacohen N (April 2018).

"Systems Immunology: Learning the Rules of the Immune System".

Annual Review of Immunology.

36 (1): 813–842.

doi : 10.

1146/annurev-immunol-042617-053035.

PMC 6597491.

PMID 29677477.

^ Janeway's Immunobiology textbook Searchable free online version at the National Center for Biotechnology Information ^ "Hypersensitivities | Microbiology".

courses.

lumenlearning.

com.

Retrieved 2018-07-25.

^ "Specific Disease Types | Immune Deficiency Foundation".

primaryimmune.

org.

Retrieved 2018-07-25.

^ "Transplant rejection: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia".

medlineplus.

gov.

Retrieved 2018-07-25.

^ Pierce CW, Solliday SM, Asofsky R (March 1972).

"Immune responses in vitro.

IV.

Suppression of primary M, G, and A plaque-forming cell responses in mouse spleen cell cultures by class-specific antibody to mouse immunoglobulins".

The Journal of Experimental Medicine.

135 (3): 675–97.

doi : 10.

1084/jem.

135.

3.

675.

PMC 2139142.

PMID 4536706.

^ Miyahara S, Yokomuro K, Takahashi H, Kimura Y (November 1983).

"Regeneration and the immune system.

I.

In vitro and in vivo activation of lymphocytes by liver regeneration and the role of Kupffer cells in stimulation".

European Journal of Immunology.

13 (11): 878–83.

doi : 10.

1002/eji.

1830131104.

PMID 6227489.

S2CID 22400759.

^ Henry Gray (1918), Anatomy of the Human Body , p.

677, archived from the original on 2009-12-22 , retrieved 2008-06-15 ^ a b "Jaundice".

MedlinePlus.

Archived from the original on 27 August 2016.

Retrieved 13 August 2016.

^ a b Buttaro, Terry Mahan; Trybulski, JoAnn; Polgar-Bailey, Patricia; Sandberg-Cook, Joanne (2012).

Primary Care: A Collaborative Practice (4 ed.

).

Elsevier Health Sciences.

p.

690.

ISBN 978-0323075855.

Archived from the original on 2017-09-08.

^ Bassari, R; Koea, JB (7 February 2015).

"Jaundice associated pruritis: a review of pathophysiology and treatment".

World Journal of Gastroenterology.

21 (5): 1404–13.

doi : 10.

3748/wjg.

v21.

i5.

1404.

PMC 4316083.

PMID 25663760.

^ (Prof.

), Roger Jones (2004).

Oxford Textbook of Primary Medical Care.

Oxford University Press.

p.

758.

ISBN 9780198567820.

Archived from the original on 2017-09-08.

^ "Facts about Jaundice and Kernicterus".

CDC.

February 23, 2015.

Archived from the original on 8 August 2016.

Retrieved 13 August 2016.

^ Whiting, William Charles; Rugg, Stuart (2006).

Dynamic Human Anatomy.

Vol.

10.

Human Kinetics.

p.

40.

ISBN 9780736036825.

^ "Articulation definition".

eMedicine Dictionary.

30 October 2013.

Archived from the original on 31 July 2012.

Retrieved 18 November 2013.

^ a b c Saladin, Ken.

Anatomy & Physiology.

7th ed.

McGraw-Hill Connect.

Web.

p.

274 ^ Standring, Susan, ed.

(2006).

Gray's anatomy: the anatomical basis of clinical practice (39th ed.

).

Edinburgh: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone.

p.

38.

ISBN 0-443-07168-3.

^ "keratogenesis" , Farlex Partner Medical Dictionary , retrieved 2022-11-03 ^ Lote, Christopher J.

(2012).

Principles of Renal Physiology, 5th edition.

Springer.

p.

21.

^ Mescher, Anthony L.

(2016).

Junqueira's Basic Histology, 14th edition.

Lange.

p.

393.

^ Chhajer, Bimal (2006).

"Anatomy of Knee".

Knee Pain.

Fusion Books.

pp.

10–1.

ISBN 978-81-8419-181-3.

^ Kulowski, Jacob (July 1932).

"Flexion contracture of the knee".

The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery.

14 (3): 618–63.

Archived from the original on 2016-08-03.

Republished as: Kulowski, J (2007).

"Flexion contracture of the knee: The mechanics of the muscular contracture and the turnbuckle cast method of treatment; with a review of fifty-five cases.

1932".

Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research.

464 : 4–10.

doi : 10.

1097/BLO.

0b013e31815760ca.

PMID 17975372.

S2CID 9932906.

^ "Korsakoff Syndrome - MeSH - NCBI".

www.

ncbi.

nlm.

nih.

gov.

^ "Korsakoff syndrome".

Retrieved 14 October 2020.

^ "large intestine".

NCI Dictionary of Cancer Terms.

National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health.

2011-02-02.

Retrieved 2014-03-04.

^ Medical Definition of Laryngeal sinus in lexic.

us.

Updated 05 Mar 2000 ^ Elias, H.

; Bengelsdorf, H.

(1 July 1952).

"The Structure of the Liver in Vertebrates".

Cells Tissues Organs.

14 (4): 297–337.

doi : 10.

1159/000140715 (inactive 2024-06-22).

PMID 14943381.

{{ cite journal }} : CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of June 2024 ( link ) ^ Abdel-Misih, Sherif R.

Z.

; Bloomston, Mark (2010).

"Liver Anatomy".

Surgical Clinics of North America.

90 (4): 643–653.

doi : 10.

1016/j.

suc.

2010.

04.

017.

PMC 4038911.

PMID 20637938.

^ a b "Anatomy and physiology of the liver – Canadian Cancer Society".

Cancer.

ca.

Archived from the original on 2015-06-26.

Retrieved 2015-06-26.

^ a b ""Depression".

NIMH.

May 2016.

Archived from the original on 5 August 2016.

Retrieved 31 July 2016.

^ a b American Psychiatric Association (2013), Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.

), Arlington: American Psychiatric Publishing, pp.

160–68, ISBN 978-0-89042-555-8 , retrieved 22 July 2016 ^ Gray's Anatomy – The Anatomical Basis of Clinical Practice, 40th Edition, p.

530 ^ Tortora, G; Derrickson, B (2011).

Principles of anatomy & physiology (13th.

ed.

).

Wiley.

p.

226.

ISBN 9780470646083.

^ Romer, Alfred Sherwood; Parsons, Thomas S.

(1977).

The Vertebrate Body.

Philadelphia, PA: Holt-Saunders International.

p.

283.

ISBN 0-03-910284-X.

^ Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary.

^ Fehrenbach; Herring (2012).

Illustrated Anatomy of the Head and Neck.

Elsevier.

p.

55.

ISBN 978-1-4377-2419-6.

^ "Melbourne Medical School International Applicants".

University of Melbourne.

Retrieved 23 October 2015.

^ Wang, Bin (2016).

"Keratin: Structure, mechanical properties, occurrence in biological organisms, and efforts at bioinspiration" (PDF).

Progress in Materials Science.

76 : 229–318.

doi : 10.

1016/j.

pmatsci.

2015.

06.

001.

^ Ehud Gazit, Plenty of room for biology at the bottom: An introduction to bionanotechnology.

Imperial College Press, 2007, ISBN 978-1-86094-677-6 ^ "nasal fossa".

TheFreeDictionary.

com.

^ Clinical Head and Neck and Functional Neuroscience Course Notes, 2008-2009, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences School of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland ^ "Definition of NAVEL".

www.

merriam-webster.

com.

13 May 2023.

^ Tortora, Gerard J.

; Derrickson, Bryan H.

(2016-09-06).

Principles of Anatomy and Physiology, 15e WileyPLUS Registration Card + Loose-leaf Print Companion (15th ed.

).

Wiley (WileyPLUS Products).

ISBN 978-1-119-34373-8.

OL 28367744M.

^ ACGME (1 July 2016).

"ACGME Program Requirements for Graduate Medical Education in Neurology" (PDF).

www.

acgme.

org.

Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 January 2017.

Retrieved 10 January 2017.

^ "Neuroscience".

Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary.

^ Kandel, Eric R.

(2012).

Principles of Neural Science, Fifth Edition.

McGraw-Hill Education.

pp.

I.

Overall perspective.

ISBN 978-0071390118.

^ Ayd, Frank J.

Jr.

(2000).

Lexicon of Psychiatry, Neurology and the Neurosciences.

Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.

p.

688.

ISBN 978-0781724685.

^ Shulman, Robert G.

(2013).

"Neuroscience: A Multidisciplinary, Multilevel Field".

Brain Imaging: What it Can (and Cannot) Tell Us About Consciousness.

Oxford University Press.

p.

59.

ISBN 9780199838721.

^ Ogawa, Hiroto; Oka, Kotaro (2013).

Methods in Neuroethological Research.

Springer.

p.

v.

ISBN 9784431543305.

^ Tanner, Kimberly D.

(2006-01-01).

"Issues in Neuroscience Education: Making Connections".

CBE: Life Sciences Education.

5 (2): 85.

doi : 10.

1187/cbe.

06-04-0156.

ISSN 1931-7913.

PMC 1618510.

^ "Neurological Surgery Specialty Description".

American Medical Association.

Retrieved 4 October 2020.

^ "Nuclear Medicine".

Archived from the original on 27 February 2015.

Retrieved 20 August 2015.

^ "Joint Collection Development Policy: Human Nutrition and Food".

US National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health.

14 October 2014.

Retrieved 13 December 2014.

^ "Definition: 'Oblique Muscle Of Auricle' ".

MediLexicon International Ltd.

Archived from the original on May 11, 2013.

Retrieved April 23, 2013.

^ This article incorporates text in the public domain from page 1035 of the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918) ^ "Obstetrics and Gynecology Specialty Description".

American Medical Association.

Retrieved 24 October 2020.

^ "Definition of olfaction".

www.

merriam-webster.

com.

18 May 2023.

^ Wolfe, J; Kluender, K; Levi, D (2012).

Sensation & perception (3rd ed.

).

Sinauer Associates.

p.

7.

ISBN 978-0-87893-572-7.

^ Maureen McCutcheon.

Where Have My Eyebrows Gone?.

Cengage Learning, 2001.

ISBN 0766839346.

Page 5.

^ "History of Ophthalmology".

www.

mrcophth.

com.

^ "Ophthalmology".

American Medical Association.

Retrieved 28 March 2020.

^ Boyd, Kierstan (6 June 2016).

"Ophthalmology Subspecialists".

American Academy of Ophthalmology.

^ Smith, Yolanda (5 September 2016).

"Ophthalmology".

News-Medical.

net.

^ Churchill, Jennifer; Gudgel, Dan T.

(1 November 2013).

"What is an Ophthalmologist?".

American Academy of Ophthalmology.

^ Widmaier E P; Raff H; Strang KT (2014).

Vander's Human Physiology (12th ed.

).

McGraw-Hill Higher Education.

ISBN 978-0-07-128366-3.

[ page needed ] ^ Wingerd, Bruce D.

(1811).

The Human Body Concepts of Anatomy and Physiology.

Fort Worth: Saunders College Publishing.

p.

166.

ISBN 0-03-055507-8.

^ Wingerd, Bruce D.

(1994).

The Human Body Concepts of Anatomy and Physiology.

Fort Worth: Saunders College Publishing.

p.

478.

ISBN 0-03-055507-8.

^ Goss, Charles Mayo (1966).

Gray's Anatomy.

Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.

p.

1172.

^ Zhukovsky D (2019).

Primer of Palliative Care.

American Association of Hospice and Palliative Medicine.

ISBN 9781889296081.

^ "WHO | WHO Definition of Palliative Care".

WHO.

Archived from the original on October 4, 2003.

Retrieved 2019-12-04.

^ Sepulveda, Cecilia; Marlin, Amanda; Yoshida, Tokuo; Ullrich, Andreas (2 August 2002).

"Palliative Care: The World Health's Global Perspective".

Journal of Pain and Symptom Management.

24 (2): 91–96.

doi : 10.

1016/S0885-3924(02)00440-2.

PMID 12231124.

^ "the definition of palpation".

Dictionary.

com.

Retrieved 10 April 2018.

^ Scott, Kevin R.

; Ahmed, Aiesha; Scott, Linda; Kothari, Milind J.

(2013-01-01), Barnes, Michael P.

; Good, David C.

(eds.

), "Chapter 42 - Rehabilitation of brachial plexus and peripheral nerve disorders" , Handbook of Clinical Neurology , Neurological Rehabilitation, 110 , Elsevier: 499–514, doi : 10.

1016/b978-0-444-52901-5.

00042-3 , ISBN 9780444529015 , PMID 23312667 , retrieved 2020-10-25 ^ "12.

Colon and Rectum" (PDF) , AJCC Cancer Staging Atlas , American Joint Committee on Cancer, 2006, p.

109, archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-06-12 , retrieved 2021-03-02 ^ a b Wolff BG, Fleshman JW, Beck DE, Pemberton JH, Wexner SD, Church JM, Garcia-Aguilar J, Roberts PL, Saclarides TJ, eds.

(2007).

The ASCRS textbook of colon and rectal surgery.

New York: Springer.

ISBN 978-0-387-24846-2.

^ Gray's Anatomy for students, 2nd edition, Page:176 ^ "Rectus Abdominis Muscle | Actions | Attachments | Origin & Insertion".

www.

getbodysmart.

com.

Retrieved 2016-11-29.

^ Sportsmedicine: Rectus Femoris Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine.

Sportsmedicine.

about.

com.

Retrieved on 2015-09-30.

^ Oxford Dictionaries and Webster's New College Dictionary (2010) admit the plural sacrums alongside sacra ; The American Heritage Dictionary , Collins Dictionary and Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictionary (1913) give sacra as the only plural.

^ "SACRUM ANATOMY".

www.

scientificspine.

com.

Archived from the original on 2021-10-08.

Retrieved 2022-11-03.

^ Edgar, Michael; Dawes, Colin; O'Mullane, Denis, eds.

(2012).

Saliva and oral health (4th ed.

).

Stephen Hancocks.

p.

1.

ISBN 978-0-9565668-3-6.

^ Trivedi, Bijal P.

(2012).

"Gustatory system: The finer points of taste".

Nature.

486 (7403): S2–S3.

Bibcode : 2012Natur.

486S.

2T.

doi : 10.

1038/486s2a.

ISSN 0028-0836.

PMID 22717400.

S2CID 4325945.

^ Witt, Martin (2019).

"Anatomy and development of the human taste system".

Smell and Taste.

Handbook of Clinical Neurology.

Vol.

164.

pp.

147–171.

doi : 10.

1016/b978-0-444-63855-7.

00010-1.

ISBN 978-0-444-63855-7.

ISSN 0072-9752.

PMID 31604544.

S2CID 204332286.

^ Human biology (Page 201/464) Daniel D.

Chiras.

Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2005.

^ N, Catena; Mg, Calevo; D, Fracassetti; D, Moharamzadeh; C, Origo; M, De Pellegrin (2019).

"Risk of Ulnar Nerve Injury During Cross-Pinning in Supine and Prone Position for Supracondylar Humeral Fractures in Children: A Recent Literature Review".

European Journal of Orthopaedic Surgery & Traumatology: Orthopedie Traumatologie.

29 (6): 1169–1175.

doi : 10.

1007/s00590-019-02444-0.

PMID 31037406.

S2CID 139108013.

Retrieved 2020-05-22.

^ Hugh Tyndale-Biscoe; Marilyn Renfree (30 January 1987).

Reproductive Physiology of Marsupials.

Cambridge University Press.

pp.

172–.

ISBN 978-0-521-33792-2.

^ Marvalee H.

Wake (15 September 1992).

Hyman's Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy.

University of Chicago Press.

pp.

583–.

ISBN 978-0-226-87013-7.

Retrieved 6 May 2013.

^ Marianne J.

Legato; John P.

Bilezikian, eds.

(2004).

"109: The Evaluation and Treatment of Urinary Incontinence".

Principles of Gender-specific Medicine.

Vol.

1.

Gulf Professional Publishing.

p.

1187.

^ Chancellor, Michael B; Yoshimura, Naoki (2004).

"Neurophysiology of Stress Urinary Incontinence".

Reviews in Urology.

6 (Suppl 3): S19–S28.

PMC 1472861.

PMID 16985861.

^ Jung, Junyang; Anh, Hyo Kwang; Huh, Youngbuhm (September 2012).

"Clinical and Functional Anatomy of the Urethral Sphincter".

International Neurourology Journal.

16 (3): 102–106.

doi : 10.

5213/inj.

2012.

16.

3.

102.

PMC 3469827.

PMID 23094214.

^ Karam, I.

; Moudouni, S.

; Droupy, S.

; Abd-Almasad, I.

; Uhl, J.

F.

; Delmas, V.

(April 2005).

"The structure and innervation of the male urethra: histological and immunohistochemical studies with three-dimensional reconstruction".

Journal of Anatomy.

206 (4): 395–403.

doi : 10.

1111/j.

1469-7580.

2005.

00402.

x.

PMC 1571491.

PMID 15817107.

^ Ashton-Miller, J.

A.

; DeLancey, J.

O.

(April 2007).

"Functional anatomy of the female pelvic floor".

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences.

1101 (1): 266–296.

Bibcode : 2007NYASA1101.

266A.

doi : 10.

1196/annals.

1389.

034.

hdl : 2027.

42/72597.

PMID 17416924.

S2CID 6310287.

^ Boron, Walter F.

; Boulpaep, Emile L.

(2016).

Medical Physiology.

Elsevier Health Sciences.

p.

738.

ISBN 9781455733286.

Retrieved 1 June 2016.

^ Walker-Smith, John; Murch, Simon (1999).

Cardozo, Linda (ed.

).

Diseases of the Small Intestine in Childhood (4 ed.

).

CRC Press.

p.

16.

ISBN 9781901865059.

Retrieved 1 June 2016.

^ "The Urinary Tract & How It Works | NIDDK".

National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.

^ C.

Dugdale, David (16 September 2011).

"Female urinary tract".

MedLine Plus Medical Encyclopedia.

^ Melief CJ, van Hall T, Arens R, Ossendorp F, van der Burg SH (September 2015).

"Therapeutic cancer vaccines".

The Journal of Clinical Investigation.

125 (9): 3401–12.

doi : 10.

1172/JCI80009.

PMC 4588240.

PMID 26214521.

^ Bol KF, Aarntzen EH, Pots JM, Olde Nordkamp MA, van de Rakt MW, Scharenborg NM, de Boer AJ, van Oorschot TG, Croockewit SA, Blokx WA, Oyen WJ, Boerman OC, Mus RD, van Rossum MM, van der Graaf CA, Punt CJ, Adema GJ, Figdor CG, de Vries IJ, Schreibelt G (March 2016).

"Prophylactic vaccines are potent activators of monocyte-derived dendritic cells and drive effective anti-tumor responses in melanoma patients at the cost of toxicity".

Cancer Immunology, Immunotherapy.

65 (3): 327–39.

doi : 10.

1007/s00262-016-1796-7.

PMC 4779136.

PMID 26861670.

^ Brotherton J (2015).

"HPV prophylactic vaccines: lessons learned from 10 years experience".

Future Virology.

10 (8): 999–1009.

doi : 10.

2217/fvl.

15.

60.

^ Frazer IH (May 2014).

"Development and implementation of papillomavirus prophylactic vaccines".

Journal of Immunology.

192 (9): 4007–11.

doi : 10.

4049/jimmunol.

1490012.

PMID 24748633.

S2CID 24181641.

^ Crawford, Dorothy (2011).

Viruses: A Very Short Introduction.

New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

p.

4.

ISBN 978-0199574858.

^ Cann, Alan (2011).

Principles of Molecular Virology (5 ed.

).

London: Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0123849397.

^ Cline D, Hofstetter HW, Griffin J (1997).

Dictionary of Visual Science (4th ed.

).

Boston: Butterworth-Heinemann.

ISBN 978-0-7506-9895-5.

^ Mather, George.

"The Visual Cortex".

School of Life Sciences: University of Sussex.

University of Sussex.

Archived from the original on 3 February 2017.

Retrieved 6 March 2017.

^ "Vital Signs".

^ "Emergency Physicians Home".

www.

emergencyphysicians.

org.

^ "Vital Signs Table - ProHealthSys".

3 July 2013.

^ "Home".

LOINC.

^ "LOINC - A Lingua Franca Critical for Electronic Medical Records and Health Information Exchange".

Archived from the original on 2016-03-08.

Retrieved 2021-02-17.

^ a b "Office of Dietary Supplements - Vitamin D".

ods.

od.

nih.

gov.

9 October 2020.

Retrieved 31 October 2020.

^ a b Norman AW (August 2008).

"From vitamin D to hormone D: fundamentals of the vitamin D endocrine system essential for good health".

The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition.

88 (2): 491S–499S.

doi : 10.

1093/ajcn/88.

2.

491S.

PMID 18689389.

^ Bikle DD (March 2014).

"Vitamin D metabolism, mechanism of action, and clinical applications".

Chemistry & Biology.

21 (3): 319–29.

doi : 10.

1016/j.

chembiol.

2013.

12.

016.

PMC 3968073.

PMID 24529992.

^ Loo, SK; Tang, WY (12 June 2014).

"Warts (non-genital)".

BMJ Clinical Evidence.

2014.

PMC 4054795.

PMID 24921240.

^ Warts: Overview.

Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQWiG).

2019-11-07.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2017.

^ Kong, Erwin L.

; Fowler, James B.

(2019), "Rinne Test" , StatPearls , StatPearls Publishing, PMID 28613725 , retrieved 2019-04-24 ^ Wahid, Nur Wahidah B.

; Attia, Maximos (2019), "Weber Test" , StatPearls , StatPearls Publishing, PMID 30252391 , retrieved 2019-04-24 ^ Bagai A, Thavendiranathan P, Detsky AS (January 2006).

"Does this patient have hearing impairment?".

JAMA.

295 (4): 416–28.

doi : 10.

1001/jama.

295.

4.

416.

PMID 16434632.

^ Mugunthan, Kayalvili; Doust, Jenny; Kurz, Bodo; Glasziou, Paul (2014-08-04).

"Is there sufficient evidence for tuning fork tests in diagnosing fractures? A systematic review".

BMJ Open.

4 (8): e005238.

doi : 10.

1136/bmjopen-2014-005238.

ISSN 2044-6055.

PMC 4127942.

PMID 25091014.

^ MedlinePlus Encyclopedia : Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome ^ Insurance Institute for Highway Safety.

"Q&A: Neck Injury".

Archived from the original on 2007-10-04.

Retrieved 2007-09-18.

^ "whiplash" at Dorland's Medical Dictionary ^ Maton D, Hopkins J, McLaughlin CW, Johnson S, Warner MQ, LaHart D, Wright JD, Kulkarni DV (1997).

Human Biology and Health.

Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, US: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 0-13-981176-1.

^ Blumenfeld, Hal (2010).

Neuroanatomy through clinical cases (2nd ed.

).

Sunderland, Mass.

: Sinauer Associates.

p.

21.

ISBN 9780878936137.

Areas of the CNS made up mainly of myelinated axons are called white matter.

^ Douglas Fields, R.

(2008).

"White Matter Matters".

Scientific American.

298 (3): 54–61.

Bibcode : 2008SciAm.

298c.

54D.

doi : 10.

1038/scientificamerican0308-54.

^ Miyake, A.

; Shah, P.

, eds.

(1999).

Models of working memory.

Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive control.

Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-58325-X.

^ a b Diamond A (2013).

"Executive functions".

Annu Rev Psychol.

64 : 135–168.

doi : 10.

1146/annurev-psych-113011-143750.

PMC 4084861.

PMID 23020641.

WM (holding information in mind and manipulating it) is distinct from short-term memory (just holding information in mind).

They cluster onto separate factors in factor analyses of children, adolescents, and adults (Alloway et al.

2004, Gathercole et al.

2004).

They are linked to different neural subsystems.

WM relies more on dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, whereas maintaining information in mind but not manipulating it [as long as the number of items is not huge (suprathreshold)] does not need involvement of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (D'Esposito et al.

1999, Eldreth et al.

2006, Smith & Jonides 1999).

Imaging studies show frontal activation only in ventrolateral prefrontal cortex for memory maintenance that is not suprathreshold.

WM and short-term memory also show different developmental progressions; the latter develops earlier and faster.

^ Malenka RC, Nestler EJ, Hyman SE (2009).

"Chapter 13: Higher Cognitive Function and Behavioral Control".

In Sydor A, Brown RY (eds.

).

Molecular Neuropharmacology: A Foundation for Clinical Neuroscience (2nd ed.

).

New York: McGraw-Hill Medical.

pp.

313–321.

ISBN 978-0-07-148127-4.

• Executive function, the cognitive control of behavior, depends on the prefrontal cortex, which is highly developed in higher primates and especially humans.

• Working memory is a short-term, capacity-limited cognitive buffer that stores information and permits its manipulation to guide decision-making and behavior.

working memory may be impaired in ADHD, the most common childhood psychiatric disorder seen in clinical settings.

ADHD can be conceptualized as a disorder of executive function; specifically, ADHD is characterized by reduced ability to exert and maintain cognitive control of behavior.

Compared with healthy individuals, those with ADHD have diminished ability to suppress inappropriate prepotent responses to stimuli (impaired response inhibition) and diminished ability to inhibit responses to irrelevant stimuli (impaired interference suppression).

Early results with structural MRI show thinning of the cerebral cortex in ADHD subjects compared with age-matched controls in prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex, areas involved in working memory and attention.

^ Cowan, Nelson (2008).

"Chapter 20 What are the differences between long-term, short-term, and working memory?".

Essence of Memory.

Progress in Brain Research.

Vol.

169.

pp.

323–338.

doi : 10.

1016/S0079-6123(07)00020-9.

ISBN 978-0-444-53164-3.

PMC 2657600.

PMID 18394484.

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) ^ Behnke 2006, p.

76.

"The wrist contains eight bones, roughly aligned in two rows, known as the carpal bones.

" ^ a b Moore 2006, p.

485.

"The wrist (carpus), the proximal segment of the hand, is a complex of eight carpal bones.

The carpus articulates proximally with the forearm at the wrist joint and distally with the five metacarpals.

The joints formed by the carpus include the wrist (radiocarpal joint), intercarpal, carpometacarpal and intermetacarpal joints.

Augmenting movement at the wrist joint, the rows of carpals glide on each other [.

] " ^ Behnke 2006, p.

77.

"With the large number of bones composing the wrist (ulna, radius, eight carpas, and five metacarpals), it makes sense that there are many, many joints that make up the structure known as the wrist.

" ^ Baratz 1999, p.

391.

"The wrist joint is composed of not only the radiocarpal and distal radioulnar joints but also the intercarpal articulations.

" ^ a b James, William D.

; Berger, Timothy G.

; et al.

(2006).

Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: clinical Dermatology.

Saunders Elsevier.

ISBN 978-0-7216-2921-6.

^ a b c d e Mitjà O; Asiedu K; Mabey D (2013).

"Yaws".

The Lancet.

381 (9868): 763–73.

doi : 10.

1016/S0140-6736(12)62130-8.

PMID 23415015.

S2CID 208791874.

^ Mitjà O; Hays R; Rinaldi AC; McDermott R; Bassat Q (2012).

"New treatment schemes for yaws: the path toward eradication".

Clinical Infectious Diseases.

55 (3): 406–412.

doi : 10.

1093/cid/cis444.

PMID 22610931.

^ a b c "Yaws Fact sheet N°316".

World Health Organization.

February 2014.

Archived from the original on 3 March 2014.

Retrieved 27 February 2014.

^ a b c d e "Yellow fever Fact sheet N°100".

World Health Organization.

May 2013.

Archived from the original on 19 February 2014.

Retrieved 23 February 2014.

^ Scully, Crispian (2014).

Scully's Medical Problems in Dentistry.

Elsevier Health Sciences.

p.

572.

ISBN 978-0-7020-5963-6.

^ "zellweger".

Zellweger UK.

Retrieved 20 February 2018.

^ "Zellweger Spectrum Disorders".

University of Michigan.

Retrieved 20 February 2018.

^ "Zellweger Spectrum Disorder".

National Organization of Rare Diseases.

Retrieved 20 February 2018.

^ "How to pronounce Zika".

HowToPronounce.

com.

^ "Zika virus".

Emerging Infectious Diseases.

20 (6): 1090.

June 2014.

doi : 10.

3201/eid2006.

ET2006.

PMC 4036762.

PMID 24983096.

^ a b Malone RW, Homan J, Callahan MV, Glasspool-Malone J, Damodaran L, Schneider A, et al.

(March 2016).

"Zika Virus: Medical Countermeasure Development Challenges".

PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases.

10 (3): e0004530.

doi : 10.

1371/journal.

pntd.

0004530.

PMC 4774925.

PMID 26934531.

^ a b Sikka V, Chattu VK, Popli RK, Galwankar SC, Kelkar D, Sawicki SG, Stawicki SP, Papadimos TJ (11 February 2016).

"The Emergence of Zika Virus as a Global Health Security Threat: A Review and a Consensus Statement of the INDUSEM Joint working Group (JWG)".

Journal of Global Infectious Diseases.

8 (1): 3–15.

doi : 10.

4103/0974-777X.

176140.

PMC 4785754.

PMID 27013839.

^ Mehrjardi MZ (1 January 2017).

"Is Zika Virus an Emerging TORCH Agent? An Invited Commentary".

Virology.

8 : 1178122X17708993.

doi : 10.

1177/1178122X17708993.

PMC 5439991.

PMID 28579764.

^ "zoonosis".

Merriam-Webster Dictionary.

Retrieved 29 March 2019.

^ WHO.

"Zoonoses".

Archived from the original on 3 January 2015.

Retrieved 18 December 2014.

^ "A glimpse into Canada's highest containment laboratory for animal health: The National Centre for Foreign Animal Diseases".

science.

gc.

ca.

Government of Canada.

22 October 2018.

Archived from the original on 20 June 2019.

Retrieved 16 August 2019.

Zoonoses are infectious diseases which jump from an animal host or reservoir into humans.

^ Aiello, F; Rampat, R; Afflitto, G Gallo; Din, N; Mandal, N; Maurino, V (7 January 2023).

"Zonular dialysis and cataract surgery: results from a UK tertiary eye care referral centre".

Canadian Journal of Ophthalmology.

59 (2): 67–72.

doi : 10.

1016/j.

jcjo.

2022.

12.

001.

PMID 36627103.

Works cited [ edit ] "British Guideline on the Management of Asthma" (PDF).

British Thoracic Society.

2012 [2008].

SIGN 101.

Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-08-19.

Retrieved 2008-08-04.

Kapandji, Ibrahim Adalbert (1982).

The Physiology of the Joints: Volume One Upper Limb (5th ed.

).

New York: Churchill Livingstone.

Marieb, Elaine N (2004).

Human Anatomy & Physiology (Sixth ed.

).

Pearson PLC.

ISBN 978-0-321-20413-4.

National Asthma Education and Prevention Program (2007).

"Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma".

National Heart Lung and Blood Institute.

EPR-3.

Palastanga, Nigel; Soames, Roger (2012).

Anatomy and Human Movement: Structure and Function (6th ed.

).

Elsevier.

ISBN 9780702040535.

Schmidt, Hans-Martin; Lanz, Ulrich (2003).

Surgical Anatomy of the Hand.

Thieme.

ISBN 978-1-58890-007-4.

v t e Medicine Specialties and subspecialties Surgery Cardiac surgery Cardiothoracic surgery Endocrine surgery Eye surgery General surgery Colorectal surgery Digestive system surgery Neurosurgery Oral and maxillofacial surgery Orthopedic surgery Hand surgery Otolaryngology ENT Pediatric surgery Plastic surgery Reproductive surgery Surgical oncology Transplant surgery Trauma surgery Urology Andrology Vascular surgery Internal medicine Allergy / Immunology Angiology Cardiology Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hepatology Geriatrics Hematology Hospital medicine Infectious diseases Nephrology Oncology Pulmonology Rheumatology Obstetrics and gynaecology Gynaecology Gynecologic oncology Maternal–fetal medicine Obstetrics Reproductive endocrinology and infertility Urogynecology Diagnostic Radiology Interventional radiology Neuroradiology Nuclear medicine Pathology Anatomical Clinical pathology Clinical chemistry Cytopathology Medical microbiology Transfusion medicine Other Addiction medicine Adolescent medicine Anesthesiology Obstetric anesthesiology Neurosurgical anesthesiology Aviation medicine Dermatology Disaster medicine Diving medicine Emergency medicine Mass gathering medicine Evolutionary medicine Family medicine / General practice Hospital medicine Intensive care medicine Medical genetics Narcology Neurology Clinical neurophysiology Occupational medicine Ophthalmology Oral medicine Pain management Palliative care Pediatrics Neonatology Phlebology Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R) Preventive medicine Prison healthcare Psychiatry Addiction psychiatry Radiation oncology Reproductive medicine Sexual medicine Venereology Sleep medicine Sports medicine Transplantation medicine Tropical medicine Travel medicine Medical education Medical school Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery Bachelor of Medical Sciences Master of Medicine Master of Surgery Doctor of Medicine Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine MD–PhD Medical Scientist Training Program Related topics Alternative medicine Allied health Molecular oncology Nanomedicine Personalized medicine Public health Rural health Therapy Traditional medicine Veterinary medicine Physician Chief physician History of medicine Category Commons Wikiproject Portal Outline v t e Human systems and organs Musculoskeletal system Skeletal system Bone Carpus Collar bone (clavicle) Thigh bone (femur) Fibula Humerus Mandible Metacarpus Metatarsus Ossicles Patella Phalanges Radius Skull Tarsus Tibia Ulna Rib Vertebra Pelvis Sternum Cartilage Joints Fibrous joint Cartilaginous joint Synovial joint Muscular system Muscle Tendon Diaphragm Circulatory system Cardiovascular system peripheral Artery Vein Lymphatic vessel Heart Lymphatic system primary Bone marrow Thymus secondary Spleen Lymph node CNS equivalent Glymphatic system Nervous system Brain Spinal cord Nerve Sensory system Ear Eye Somatic system Tissue Integumentary system Skin Subcutaneous tissue Breast Mammary gland Haematopoietic and immune systems Myeloid Myeloid immune system Lymphoid Lymphoid immune system Respiratory system Upper Nose Nasopharynx Larynx Lower Trachea Bronchus Lung Digestive system Mouth Salivary gland Tongue Lip Tooth upper GI Oropharynx Laryngopharynx Esophagus Stomach lower GI Small intestine Appendix Colon Rectum Anus accessory Liver Biliary tract Pancreas Urinary system Genitourinary system Kidney Ureter Bladder Urethra Reproductive system Male Scrotum Penis Prostate Testicle Seminal vesicle Female Uterus Vagina Vulva Ovary Placenta Endocrine system Pituitary Pineal Thyroid Parathyroid Adrenal Islets of Langerhans v t e Human regional anatomy Body Skin Head Hair Face Forehead Cheek Chin Eyebrow Eye Eyelid Nose Mouth Lip Tongue Tooth Ear Jaw Mandible Occiput Scalp Temple Neck Adam's apple Throat Nape Torso (Trunk) Abdomen Waist Midriff Navel Vertebral column Back Thorax Breast Nipple Pelvis Genitalia Penis Scrotum Vulva Anus Limbs Arm Shoulder Axilla Elbow Forearm Wrist Hand Finger Fingernail Thumb Index Middle Ring Little Leg Buttocks Hip Thigh Knee Calf Foot Ankle Heel Toe Toenail Sole v t e Glossaries of science and engineering Aerospace engineering Agriculture Archaeology Architecture Artificial intelligence Astronomy Biology Botany Calculus Cell biology Chemistry Civil engineering Clinical research Computer hardware Computer science Developmental and reproductive biology Ecology Economics Electrical and electronics engineering Engineering A–L M–Z Entomology Environmental science Genetics and evolutionary biology Cellular and molecular biology 0–L M–Z Geography A–M N–Z Arabic toponyms Hebrew toponyms Western and South Asia Geology Ichthyology Machine vision Mathematics Mechanical engineering Medicine Meteorology Mycology Nanotechnology Ornithology Physics Probability and statistics Psychiatry Quantum computing Robotics Scientific naming Structural engineering Virology Retrieved from " https://en.

wikipedia.

org/w/index.

php?title=Glossary_of_medicine&oldid=1231906622 " Categories : Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918) Glossaries of medicine Glossaries of science Hidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of January 2024 CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2010 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of June 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2015 CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016 All articles containing potentially dated statements Wikipedia glossaries using unordered lists This page was last edited on 30 June 2024, at 22:43 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.

0 ; additional terms may apply.

By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view.