William G.

McCallum - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and professional work 2 Selected honors and awards 3 Current projects 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents William G.

McCallum 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification.

Please help by adding reliable sources.

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous.

Find sources: "William G.

McCallum" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) William G.

McCallum William G.

McCallum (born 1956 in Sydney , Australia) is a University Distinguished Professor of Mathematics and was Head of the Department of Mathematics at the University of Arizona from 2009 to 2013.

Education and professional work [ edit ] He was educated at North Sydney Boys High School.

[1] He received his Ph.

D.

in Mathematics from Harvard University in 1984, under the supervision of Barry Mazur.

After spending two years at the University of California, Berkeley , and one at the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute in Berkeley, he joined the faculty at the University of Arizona in 1987.

In 1989 he joined the Harvard calculus consortium, and is the lead author of the consortium's multivariable calculus and college algebra texts.

In 1993–94 he spent a year at the Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques , and in 1995–96 he spent a year at the Institute for Advanced Study on a Centennial Fellowship from the American Mathematical Society.

In 2006 he founded the Institute for Mathematics & Education at the University of Arizona.

He was Director of the Institute until 2009 and again starting in 2013.

In 2009–2010 he was one of the lead writers for the Common Core State Standards in Mathematics.

His professional interests include arithmetical algebraic geometry and mathematics education.

Selected honors and awards [ edit ] 2012: Fellow of the American Mathematical Society.

[2] 2012: The Mary P.

Dolciani Award , administered by the Mathematical Association of America 2012: The American Mathematical Society Distinguished Public Service Award 2006: University of Arizona College of Science Galileo Circle Fellow.

2005: National Science Foundation ’s Director's Award for Distinguished Teaching Scholars 1996: The University of Arizona College of Science Innovation in Teaching Award 1995: The American Mathematical Society Centennial Research Fellowship.

Current projects [ edit ] Institute for Mathematics and Education Common Core State Standards in Mathematics Illustrative Mathematics Project Standards Progressions for the Common Core Tools for the Common Core Blog The Klein Project Mathematical Models at the University of Arizona References [ edit ] ^ NSBHS Higher School Certificate 1973 ^ List of Fellows of the American Mathematical Society , retrieved 2015-01-12 External links [ edit ] The U.

S.

Common Core State Standards , paper presented at ICME 12, Seoul, Korea (slides for this talk) Restoring and Balancing, in Usiskin, Anderson, and Zotto (eds), Future Curricular Trends in School Algebra and Geometry, Information Age Publishing (2010) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National France BnF data Catalonia Israel United States Academics CiNii MathSciNet Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.

wikipedia.

org/w/index.

php?title=William_G.

_McCallum&oldid=1085073113 " Categories : Living people 1956 births Australian mathematicians University of Arizona faculty Harvard University alumni Fellows of the American Mathematical Society People educated at North Sydney Boys High School Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from April 2022 BLP articles lacking sources from March 2014 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles with ISNI identifiers Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with BNF identifiers Articles with BNFdata identifiers Articles with CANTICN identifiers Articles with J9U identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with CINII identifiers Articles with MATHSN identifiers Articles with MGP identifiers Articles with ZBMATH identifiers Articles with SUDOC identifiers This page was last edited on 28 April 2022, at 07:16 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.

0 ; additional terms may apply.

By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view.