Arithmetica Universalis - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Publication history 2 Lack of credit for the writer 3 Content 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Arithmetica Universalis 10 languages বাংলা Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית 日本語 Português Русский Suomi தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by Isaac Newton Arithmetica Title page (1707) Raphson 's Eng.

Tr.

(1720) Arithmetica Universalis ("Universal Arithmetic") is a mathematics text by Isaac Newton.

Written in Latin , it was edited and published by William Whiston , Newton's successor as Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge.

The Arithmetica was based on Newton's lecture notes.

Publication history [ edit ] Whiston's original edition was published in 1707.

It was translated into English by Joseph Raphson , who published it in 1720 as the Universal Arithmetick.

John Machin published a second Latin edition in 1722.

Lack of credit for the writer [ edit ] None of these editions credit Newton as author; Newton was unhappy with the publication of the Arithmetica , and so refused to have his name appear.

In fact, when Whiston's edition was published, Newton was so upset he considered purchasing all of the copies so he could destroy them.

Content [ edit ] The Arithmetica touches on algebraic notation, arithmetic, the relationship between geometry and algebra , and the solution of equations.

Newton also applied Descartes ' rule of signs to imaginary roots.

He also offered, without proof, a rule to determine the number of imaginary roots of polynomial equations.

A rigorous proof of Newton's counting formula for equations up to and including the fifth degree was published by James Joseph Sylvester in 1864.

[1] References [ edit ] ^ Sylvester, J.

J.

(6 April 1864).

"Algebraical Researches, containing a disquisition on Newton's Rule for the Discovery of Imaginary Roots, and an allied Rule applicable to a particular class of Equations, together with a complete invariantive determination of the character of the Roots of the General Equation of the fifth Degree, &c".

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society.

154 : 580–591.

Retrieved 29 October 2023.

The Arithmetica Universalis from the Grace K.

Babson Collection, including links to PDFs of English and Latin versions of the Arithmetica Centre College Library information on Newton's works External links [ edit ] Arithmetica Universalis (1707), first edition Universal Arithmetick (1720), English translation by Joseph Raphson Arithmetica Universalis (1722), second edition Wikiquote has quotations related to Isaac Newton#Arithmetica Universalis (1707).

v t e Sir Isaac Newton Publications Fluxions (1671) De Motu (1684) Principia (1687) Opticks (1704) Queries (1704) Arithmetica (1707) De Analysi (1711) Other writings Quaestiones (1661–1665) " standing on the shoulders of giants " (1675) Notes on the Jewish Temple (c.

1680) " General Scholium " (1713; " hypotheses non fingo " ) Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728) Corruptions of Scripture (1754) Contributions Calculus fluxion Impact depth Inertia Newton disc Newton polygon Newton–Okounkov body Newton's reflector Newtonian telescope Newton scale Newton's metal Spectrum Structural coloration Newtonianism Bucket argument Newton's inequalities Newton's law of cooling Newton's law of universal gravitation post-Newtonian expansion parameterized gravitational constant Newton–Cartan theory Schrödinger–Newton equation Newton's laws of motion Kepler's laws Newtonian dynamics Newton's method in optimization Apollonius's problem truncated Newton method Gauss–Newton algorithm Newton's rings Newton's theorem about ovals Newton–Pepys problem Newtonian potential Newtonian fluid Classical mechanics Corpuscular theory of light Leibniz–Newton calculus controversy Newton's notation Rotating spheres Newton's cannonball Newton–Cotes formulas Newton's method generalized Gauss–Newton method Newton fractal Newton's identities Newton polynomial Newton's theorem of revolving orbits Newton–Euler equations Newton number kissing number problem Newton's quotient Parallelogram of force Newton–Puiseux theorem Absolute space and time Luminiferous aether Newtonian series table Personal life Woolsthorpe Manor (birthplace) Cranbury Park (home) Early life Later life Apple tree Religious views Occult studies Scientific Revolution Copernican Revolution Relations Catherine Barton (niece) John Conduitt (nephew-in-law) Isaac Barrow (professor) William Clarke (mentor) Benjamin Pulleyn (tutor) John Keill (disciple) William Stukeley (friend) William Jones (friend) Abraham de Moivre (friend) Depictions Newton by Blake (monotype) Newton by Paolozzi (sculpture) Isaac Newton Gargoyle Astronomers Monument Namesake Newton (unit) Newton's cradle Isaac Newton Institute Isaac Newton Medal Isaac Newton Telescope Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes XMM-Newton Sir Isaac Newton Sixth Form Statal Institute of Higher Education Isaac Newton Newton International Fellowship Categories Isaac Newton Retrieved from " https://en.

wikipedia.

org/w/index.

php?title=Arithmetica_Universalis&oldid=1217884915 " Categories : 1707 non-fiction books 1720 non-fiction books Mathematics books Books by Isaac Newton 18th-century books in Latin Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2023 This page was last edited on 8 April 2024, at 12:47 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.

0 ; additional terms may apply.

By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view.