Stationary point - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Turning points 2 Classification 3 Curve sketching Toggle Curve sketching subsection 3.

1 Examples 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Stationary point 17 languages العربية Čeština Español Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands Polski Română Slovenščina தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Print/export Download as PDF Printable version Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Zero of the derivative of a function Not to be confused with a fixed point where x = f ( x ).

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations.

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The stationary points are the red circles.

In this graph, they are all relative maxima or relative minima.

The blue squares are inflection points.

In mathematics , particularly in calculus , a stationary point of a differentiable function of one variable is a point on the graph of the function where the function's derivative is zero.

[1] [2] [3] Informally, it is a point where the function "stops" increasing or decreasing (hence the name).

For a differentiable function of several real variables , a stationary point is a point on the surface of the graph where all its partial derivatives are zero (equivalently, the gradient has zero norm ).

The notion of stationary points of a real-valued function is generalized as critical points for complex-valued functions.

Stationary points are easy to visualize on the graph of a function of one variable: they correspond to the points on the graph where the tangent is horizontal (i.

e.

, parallel to the x -axis ).

For a function of two variables, they correspond to the points on the graph where the tangent plane is parallel to the xy plane.

The notion of a stationary point allows the mathematical description of an astronomical phenomenon that was unexplained before the time of Copernicus.

A stationary point is the point in the apparent trajectory of the planet on the celestial sphere , where the motion of the planet seems to stop, before restarting in the other direction (see apparent retrograde motion ).

This occurs because of the projection of the planet orbit into the ecliptic circle.

Turning points [ edit ] A turning point of a differentiable function is a point at which the derivative has an isolated zero and changes sign at the point.

[2] A turning point may be either a relative maximum or a relative minimum (also known as local minimum and maximum).

A turning point is thus a stationary point, but not all stationary points are turning points.

If the function is twice differentiable, the isolated stationary points that are not turning points are horizontal inflection points.

For example, the function x ↦ x 3 {\displaystyle x\mapsto x^{3}} has a stationary point at x = 0 , which is also an inflection point, but is not a turning point.

[3] Classification [ edit ] A graph in which local extrema and global extrema have been labeled.

See also: maxima and minima Isolated stationary points of a C 1 {\displaystyle C^{1}} real valued function f : R → R {\displaystyle f\colon \mathbb {R} \to \mathbb {R} } are classified into four kinds, by the first derivative test : a local minimum ( minimal turning point or relative minimum ) is one where the derivative of the function changes from negative to positive; a local maximum ( maximal turning point or relative maximum ) is one where the derivative of the function changes from positive to negative; Saddle points (stationary points that are neither local maxima nor minima: they are inflection points.

The left is a "rising point of inflection" (derivative is positive on both sides of the red point); the right is a "falling point of inflection" (derivative is negative on both sides of the red point).

a rising point of inflection (or inflexion ) is one where the derivative of the function is positive on both sides of the stationary point; such a point marks a change in concavity ; a falling point of inflection (or inflexion ) is one where the derivative of the function is negative on both sides of the stationary point; such a point marks a change in concavity.

The first two options are collectively known as " local extrema ".

Similarly a point that is either a global (or absolute) maximum or a global (or absolute) minimum is called a global (or absolute) extremum.

The last two options—stationary points that are not local extrema—are known as saddle points.

By Fermat's theorem , global extrema must occur (for a C 1 {\displaystyle C^{1}} function) on the boundary or at stationary points.

Curve sketching [ edit ] The roots , stationary points , inflection point and concavity of a cubic polynomial x 3 − 6 x 2 + 9 x − 4 (solid black curve) and its first (dashed red) and second (dotted orange) derivatives.

Determining the position and nature of stationary points aids in curve sketching of differentiable functions.

Solving the equation f ′ ( x ) = 0 returns the x -coordinates of all stationary points; the y -coordinates are trivially the function values at those x -coordinates.

The specific nature of a stationary point at x can in some cases be determined by examining the second derivative f″ ( x ): If f″ ( x ) < 0, the stationary point at x is concave down; a maximal extremum.

If f″ ( x ) > 0, the stationary point at x is concave up; a minimal extremum.

If f″ ( x ) = 0, the nature of the stationary point must be determined by way of other means, often by noting a sign change around that point.

A more straightforward way of determining the nature of a stationary point is by examining the function values between the stationary points (if the function is defined and continuous between them).

A simple example of a point of inflection is the function f ( x ) = x 3.

There is a clear change of concavity about the point x = 0, and we can prove this by means of calculus.

The second derivative of f is the everywhere-continuous 6 x , and at x = 0, f″ = 0, and the sign changes about this point.

So x = 0 is a point of inflection.

More generally, the stationary points of a real valued function f : R n → R {\displaystyle f\colon \mathbb {R} ^{n}\to \mathbb {R} } are those points x 0 where the derivative in every direction equals zero, or equivalently, the gradient is zero.

Examples [ edit ] For the function f ( x ) = x 4 we have f ′ (0) = 0 and f″ (0) = 0.

Even though f″ (0) = 0, this point is not a point of inflection.

The reason is that the sign of f ′ ( x ) changes from negative to positive.

For the function f ( x ) = sin( x ) we have f ′ (0) ≠ 0 and f″ (0) = 0.

But this is not a stationary point, rather it is a point of inflection.

This is because the concavity changes from concave downwards to concave upwards and the sign of f ′ ( x ) does not change; it stays positive.

For the function f ( x ) = x 3 we have f ′ (0) = 0 and f″ (0) = 0.

This is both a stationary point and a point of inflection.

This is because the concavity changes from concave downwards to concave upwards and the sign of f ′ ( x ) does not change; it stays positive.

For the function f ( x ) = 0, one has f ′ (0) = 0 and f″ (0) = 0.

The point 0 is a non-isolated stationary point which is not a turning point nor a horizontal point of inflection as the signs of f ′ ( x ) and f″ ( x ) do not change.

The function f ( x ) = x 5 sin(1/ x ) for x ≠ 0, and f (0) = 0, gives an example where f ′ ( x ) and f″ ( x ) are both continuous, f ′ (0) = 0 and f″ (0) = 0, and yet f ( x ) does not have a local maximum, a local minimum, nor a point of inflection at 0.

So, 0 is a stationary point that is not isolated.

See also [ edit ] Optimization (mathematics) Fermat's theorem Derivative test Fixed point (mathematics) Saddle point References [ edit ] ^ Chiang, Alpha C.

(1984).

Fundamental Methods of Mathematical Economics (3rd ed.

).

New York: McGraw-Hill.

p.

236.

ISBN 0-07-010813-7.

^ a b Saddler, David; Shea, Julia; Ward, Derek (2011), "12 B Stationary Points and Turning Points" , Cambridge 2 Unit Mathematics Year 11 , Cambridge University Press, p.

318, ISBN 9781107679573 ^ a b "Turning points and stationary points".

TCS FREE high school mathematics 'How-to Library'.

Retrieved 30 October 2011.

External links [ edit ] Inflection Points of Fourth Degree Polynomials — a surprising appearance of the golden ratio at cut-the-knot v t e Calculus Precalculus Binomial theorem Concave function Continuous function Factorial Finite difference Free variables and bound variables Graph of a function Linear function Radian Rolle's theorem Secant Slope Tangent Limits Indeterminate form Limit of a function One-sided limit Limit of a sequence Order of approximation (ε, δ)-definition of limit Differential calculus Derivative Second derivative Partial derivative Differential Differential operator Mean value theorem Notation Leibniz's notation Newton's notation Rules of differentiation linearity Power Sum Chain L'Hôpital's Product General Leibniz's rule Quotient Other techniques Implicit differentiation Inverse functions and differentiation Logarithmic derivative Related rates Stationary points First derivative test Second derivative test Extreme value theorem Maximum and minimum Further applications Newton's method Taylor's theorem Differential equation Ordinary differential equation Partial differential equation Stochastic differential equation Integral calculus Antiderivative Arc length Riemann integral Basic properties Constant of integration Fundamental theorem of calculus Differentiating under the integral sign Integration by parts Integration by substitution trigonometric Euler Tangent half-angle substitution Partial fractions in integration Quadratic integral Trapezoidal rule Volumes Washer method Shell method Integral equation Integro-differential equation Vector calculus Derivatives Curl Directional derivative Divergence Gradient Laplacian Basic theorems Line integrals Green's Stokes' Gauss' Multivariable calculus Divergence theorem Geometric Hessian matrix Jacobian matrix and determinant Lagrange multiplier Line integral Matrix Multiple integral Partial derivative Surface integral Volume integral Advanced topics Differential forms Exterior derivative Generalized Stokes' theorem Tensor calculus Sequences and series Arithmetico-geometric sequence Types of series Alternating Binomial Fourier Geometric Harmonic Infinite Power Maclaurin Taylor Telescoping Tests of convergence Abel's Alternating series Cauchy condensation Direct comparison Dirichlet's Integral Limit comparison Ratio Root Term Special functions and numbers Bernoulli numbers e (mathematical constant) Exponential function Natural logarithm Stirling's approximation History of calculus Adequality Brook Taylor Colin Maclaurin Generality of algebra Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Infinitesimal Infinitesimal calculus Isaac Newton Fluxion Law of Continuity Leonhard Euler Method of Fluxions The Method of Mechanical Theorems Lists Integrals rational functions irrational functions exponential functions logarithmic functions hyperbolic functions inverse trigonometric functions inverse Secant Secant cubed List of limits List of derivatives Miscellaneous topics Complex calculus Contour integral Differential geometry Manifold Curvature of curves of surfaces Tensor Euler–Maclaurin formula Gabriel's horn Integration Bee Proof that 22/7 exceeds π Regiomontanus' angle maximization problem Steinmetz solid Retrieved from " https://en.

wikipedia.

org/w/index.

php?title=Stationary_point&oldid=1210659594 " Category : Differential calculus Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2016 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 27 February 2024, at 18:47 (UTC).

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.

0 ; additional terms may apply.

By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view.